Filename	Description 	Need1	Technology1	Need2	Technology2	Need3	Technology3	Need4	Technology4	Need5	Technology5	Need6	Technology6	Need7	Technology7	Public Input: Submission to WHS	Public Input: Survey Results	Public Input: Stakeholder Consultation Report	Public Input: External Conference Report	Public Input: Key document	WHS Output: Stakeholder Analysis Report	WHS Output: Co-Chairs Summary	WHS Output: Thematic report	WHS Output: Online consultation report	Stakeholder Group: Affected communities	Stakeholder Group: Civil society groups	Stakeholder Group: Local NGOs	Stakeholder Group: Member States	Stakeholder Group: UN Agency	Stakeholder Group: INGOs	Stakeholder Group: Regional bodies	Stakeholder Group: Academia	Stakeholder Group: Multiple stakeholders	WCA Documents	NSEA Documents	EOG Documents	MENA Documents	LAC Documents	Pacific Region	Global Documents	National Context: Bahrain	National Context: Barbados	National Context: Trinidad and Tobago	National Context: Congo	National Context: Japan	National Context: New Zealand	National Context: Samoa	National Context: Solomon Islands016-VOL%2020_Towards%20the%20WHS%20LowDef.pdf	"Pg. 7/16: Last Mile Mobile Solutions (LMMS) is a software system – developed by and for aid-workers – that enables staff to register people affected by disasters and better manage services offered to them. “A lot of time used to be taken up with transforming report data into a computer back at the office. Using LMMS means we have more time to focus on results,” a World Vision field monitor said. The tool is used by World Vision in eight countries in Africa as well as in Haiti and Pakistan. The Early Warning for Early Action index is an intuitive and simple-to-use app that World Vision has been using across 14 countries in Africa. It gathers field data, summarises it into an index, makes projections six months in advance and automatically suggests management and programmatic actions."	Online Registration	Mobile	 		 		 		 		 		 		x														x																		022-french-non-paper-on-humanitarian-action-for-the-world-humanitarian-summit.pdf	"Pg. 5/7: o Developing innovative technologies and approaches, in connection with the private sector (telephony, transportation, infrastructure, etc.). In particular, research and dissemination of ICT in favor of aid to populations (SMS, cash transfers) should be encouraged whenever possible. In addition, the steady growth in the number of forcibly displaced persons in urban areas requires adapting humanitarian aid to this environment (food cards, online registration for example)."	Communication	Mobile	Online Cash	Mobile	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	x												x																				19 2015 - WFP- COMPILATION FOR CIRCULATION.pdf	"Pg. 18/19: Harnessing technology for assessment, monitoring and outreach Technology-based options for assessments, monitoring, communication and participation, such as mobile phones, SMS messages, radio and social media, are increasingly used as an option to reach populations, strengthen their participation, and receive feedback. As such, the use of these technologies can address or partially offset restrictions to proximity."	Communication	Mobile	Communication	Radio	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	x																																2014.06.13 Déclaration conférence Ndjamena1.doc	"Pg. 2/4: [E]n effet, nous avons pu constater, au Niger par exemple, que l’usage de téléphones portables pour transférer du cash aux populations au lieu des traditionnelles distributions de vivres s’est avéré tout à fait adapté et apprécié par les populations."	Online Cash	Mobile													x																		x														2 DHP Sep 2014 INNOVATION background and conclusions PRESENTATION.pdf	"Pg. 3-4/11: 2. Spain highlighted innovative partnerships between the public and private sector, a project that supplied solar energy to a 45,000-person refugee camp in Ethiopia thatwas off the power grid, but which had previously been consuming large amounts of firewood to meet energy needs. Spain identified several challenges in the advancement of innovation, such as the need for better managerial experience in multi-stakeholder collaboration and the need for increased funding for innovation. Spain noted that incentives such as tax relief were vital for engaging relevant private sector partners and the importance of working with locally based companies. 3. Brazil presented its innovative approach to social safety net and local procurement programs from its national context, noting that it had given special attention to programs that bridge the divide between traditional, and often paternalistic forms of assistance and more innovative, empowering instruments geared towards providing assistance while fomenting development. In order to assist the UN system in ""scaling up"" these types of innovation, Brazil has financed small scale pilot projects such as WFP's Purchase 4 Progress, PAA Africa and, most recently, PAA Refugees (UNHCR) and PAA Asia (just launched in the Philippines). Brazil emphasized the importance in its own country of providing emergency assistance when needed, but also reducing vulnerability and extreme poverty on an on-going basis.Pg. 4/11: 4. Sweden highlighted the “3N” (Les Nigériens nourrissent les Nigériens) program, an innovative four-year, multi-sector program implemented in Niger starting in 2012. The primary innovation in this case was to change from an approach of responding to recurrent food insecurity only in times of emergency, but instead to establish collaborative risk reduction programs that made drought-affected communities less vulnerable to shocks overall. 5. Turkey emphasized the central role that national governments play in humanitarian innovation and action through economic and legislative means, and noted that these lessons should be more widely shared.Pg. 5/11: • Mobile connectivity (including SMS-enabled tools such as emergency early warning alerts; , mobile cash transfers; and the use of smart phone tools for needs assessment). • Data Analytics, including crowdsourcing for damage and needs assessment, big data analysis, and satellite imagery to track humanitarian trends. • Field Support Tools for improved information and logistics, such as Micro-UAVs for aerial assessment and delivery of goods; Tracking tools such as smart boxes and sensors used to track vaccine quality; restoration of emergency connectivity, such as the Emergency.LU tool. • Non-ICT tools were also mentioned, including advance water filters, solar power and alternative energy, and pop-up shelters like those designed by UNHCR and Ikea. Examples of “frugal innovation” were also cited, such as Potters for Peace, Litres of Light, and the Makiri hybrid cook stoves.Pg. 3/11: Session 2: Humanitarian innovation and development  An emerging area of focus in humanitarian innovation is the effort to ensure that a short- term humanitarian response to a particular emergency also supports local community resilience and strengthens sustainable development. Members discussed the need to adopt new methods of working and new organizational structures that would enable these kinds of linkages. Some potential examples include the use of cash-based programming that supports local markets, promoting local procurement of good and services to supply humanitarian goods, or linking humanitarian programming to social safety nets and insurance mechanisms for vulnerable populations.Pg. 5/11: 1) Members noted the important role of governments in data management and analysis at the national level, particularly where politically sensitive and unverified data in emergencies is concerned. The example of OCHA’s Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX) was noted, highlighting that governments are among the priority users of and contributors to HDX and that some governments are taking the lead in promoting open data (eg. Kenya).Pg. 5/11: 2) Members were particularly engaged in the discussion of technology-related challenges, such as sustainability in resource-poor settings; exclusion perpetuated by technology- enabled programs; and challenges in ensuring data privacy and informed consent. Several Member States also voiced concern over the lack of verification of crowd- mapped data after emergencies, which can lead to misinformation and confusion, and highlighted the need to limit the use of voluntary information tools as a basis for decision making until they can be verified.Pg. 9/11: a. DHP Members explored a number of case studies of innovation in humanitarian response, including around the use of big data, mobile phones or small unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for needs assessment, solar power in refugee camps, crowd-sourced mapping of satellite imagery; as well as ""frugal innovations"" that use sustainable local technology, such as pottery water filters.Pg. 11/11: f. DHP Members also recommend Member States to consider how to strengthen the role of humanitarian innovation in the post-2015 Development Agenda, the Third World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction, the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development and other processes. This could include: i. Ensuring that R&D funds and investments for development also include issues around risk reduction and more effective disaster and humanitarian response. ii. Ensuring that specific innovations like disaster insurance, e- transfers, big data, advanced risk modelling, and new technologies that apply to both humanitarian action and resilience and risk reduction are recognized and supported."	Alternative Energy	Solar Power													x																																43 34_SLB_WHJS Consulation report.pdf	"Pg. 10/36: Existing Innovative Solutions Community Based Disaster Risk Management (CBDRM) Programmes The Solomon Islands through a donor support piloted a concept of “community flood early warning system” comprising of very basic technology but effective enough to alert communities of impending flood danger. The pilot programme was designed basing on the following assumptions: 1. That the communities do not have access to transistor radio thus are unable to receive alerts. 2. Out of range from telephone or mobile contact which true about a lot communities in the Solomon Islands. 3. Community close to major river system and is regularly affected by floods. 4. Use of basic village level technology – rain and flood gauge with village technicians trained to maintain records and undertaking basic maintenance to instruments. 5. That different level reading – rainfall or flood level triggers different activation levels of the Village Disaster Risk Plan so even without warnings from authorities, village disaster committees can activate their own emergency response plans. 6. On-going support from relevant Govt mandated ministries. 7. Low cost and owned by the community. This concept will be rolled out in 15 communities including schools identified by Provincial Disaster Officers. For schools, this programme will form part of the school safety club designed to be part of the school’s extra-curricular activities.Pg. 10/36: Community Vulnerability and Risk Management tool (CVRM) This is a tool which is now been piloted in 10 communities in Temotu Province and 10 Communities on Guadalcanal Province. Funded by the World Bank, this tool is a “marriage” between the CDBRM tool used by NDMO and the Vulnerability Assessment and Adaptation (VAA) tool used by the Climate Change Office. Once fully tested, this will be the Solomon Islands guide to community engagements for use by all partners undertakes DRR/CCA at the community level.Pg. 11/36: Under World Bank support, Solomon Island is installing a radio communication system that will enable communication to continue despite any disasters. This is important in that the Solomon Islands experienced communication breakdown every time there is a disaster impact. This is either due to infrastructure damage or due to increase use thus traffic jamming up. This system will have alerting, data and voice capability. The system will be installed in all Provincial Disaster Offices and will provide the “last mile” communication to communities.Pg. 18/36: NEW INOVATION • Standalone radio communication system for emergency communication during disaster events. • CVRM Tool – combined tool for DRR/CCA community based activities • New innovation, use of smart phone speed up data collection. • Geographically location is always a problem, suggested to use drones to do Arial surveys, to minimize logistic"	Early Warning	Mobile	Online Cash	Mobile	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics	Damage & Need Assessment	Imagery (UAV/Satellite)	Alternative Energy	Solar Power	Damage & Need Assessment	Crowdsourcing	Damage & Need Assessment	Crowdsourcing	x												x																				x9 [Spain] WHS Positioning Paper.pdf	"Pg. 6/9: Innovative information management: The humanitarian action is benefitting from a highly increased access to information, hard information as well as analytical one from both ground based sources and others. This enables primary players of the humanitarian action (the affected populations) to express and channel their views, perceptions and opinions to the rest of the players in the supply chain. This enormous asset should be used in the most efficient way by overcoming the indicators monitoring and ensuring the interconnected analysis of empirical data to back up operational response, quality assurance and policy guidance. New technologies give us the opportunity to include fresh information and analyze it in real time in order to drive the responses and correct potential mistakes before it is too late."	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics													x												x																				Humanitarian Trends in Southern Africa_ Challenges and Opportunities.pdf	"Pg. 101/161: 5.5 *PLEASE CALL ME* Perhaps one of the most pervasive resources for vulnerability reduction has been the impressive expansion of mobile phone users in southern Africa. Table 5.5.1 and Figure 5.5.1 respectively show the extraordinary increase in mobile phone subscriptions and associated coverage in the past decade. By the end of 2011, it was estimated that there were approximately 120 million mobile phone subscriptions in the study countries. The Institute for Security Studies (ISS) argues that “mobile phones have become tools for social transformation. Small-scale farmers link up with markets, citizens can report (and video) instances of abuse... and citizens can identify instances of crime” (Cilliers et al., 2011:53)Pg. 102/161: Citing the Economist (September 2009), they argue that “adding an extra ten mobile phones per hundred people in a typical developing country boosts growth in GDP per person by 0.8 percentage points” (ibid). The expansion of ICT in southern Africa – and particularly growing access to mobile phones represents an untapped resource for humanitarian action – especially as it expedites access to ‘mobile money’ (Cilliers et al., 2011:54), which may be crucial for reducing vulnerability during times of duress."	Communication	Mobile	Online Cash	Mobile											x															x																	WHS EOG Youth survey data.xls	"Pg. 93/180: Social media ensures an impressively wide audience to any updates on the global emergency sphere. With the involvement of celebrities, the humanitarian assistance that will be available, either directly or indirectly, will change millions of lives globally. new technology gives us the opportunity to be imformed faster and act faster in order to help in an emergency situationPg. 97/180: First of all, new technology can better identify risks and, therefore, help build resilience to avoid disasters. New technology can ensure a faster spread of official, verified information. For example, early warnings can be transmitted via text message to each person located in a region at risk, allowing for quicker and more efficient response. It can also be used to locate victims or identify communities or areas that are priorities. Emergency response plans can easily be shared with whole regions and new means of communication can ensure quick mobilization of response teams and organizations. New technology can also help the mobilization of civil society, by identifying households that can take in victims or distribute food and water."	Early Warning	Social Media	Build Resilience	Risk Management	Communication	Mobile										x																															01072014 WHS-RC UN Japan Inputs.final.docx	"Pg. 4/5: b) Social media, open source data, and big data analysis: This needs to be prioritized in the WHS-RC discussion, given the huge potentials for using these to save lives and assist the affected populations. A lot of public interests, media stories and relevant researches on these in Japan that need to be fed into the WHS discussion around innovation effectively."	Communication	Social Media	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics													x											x						x										x			11 Redhum-LAC-Doc-Executive_Report-National_Consultation-Antigua__Barbuda-WHS-201504-20150430-DS-16368.pdf	"Pg. 4/10: Utilize social media should be utilize more effectively to build networks of humanitarian actors, communities and other partnersPg. 8/10: Utilize social media to build networks of humanitarian actors, public sector and beneficiaries..."	Communication	Social Media															x										x										x										12 Redhum-LAC-Doc-Executive_Report-National_Consultation-Barbados-WHS-201504-20150430-DS-16363.pdf	"Pg. 6/11: Social Media • Recommended the use of social media to enhance DEM’s visibility (to assist in public awareness and education) and sensitization of the public (Policy makers can make adjustments).Pg. 6/11: Use of Technologies Application/Implementation of the Information Communication Technology (ICT) Strategy • Recognized the existing technological efforts to use technology to enhance decision making and noted the use of various platforms, e.g. DEWETRAPg. 7/11: Use of Various Platforms • Noted the information provided by the GPS app called WAZE.Pg. 7/11: Use of technology to improve the effectives of agencies • Recommended the use of technology to better track assistance given (i.e. who has been impacted, their needs, and the actions applied to particular crisis, this would be based on need, this is defined based on what was there before) this will improve accountability of organizations; • Noted that the above recommendation can be used for the parish of St Lucy (who has a system which can feed into the overall system); • Recommended the use of Drones/Aircraft to map data; • Also recommended the mapping of the country (aircraft to video tape areas, store data,) in the event of a disaster, aircraft can travel the same route and examine the impacted routes; • Recommended the Identification of major suppliers in Bridgetown – (Noted: make an effort to encourage businesses in the northern zone to maintain a higher level of stock which can be drawn down). • Suggested the use of an Identification Card – where persons can show cards at selected supermarkets to receive emergency supplies;Pg. 11/11: Transformation Through Innovation • The effective use of social media by other agencies within the disaster management system."	Education/Awareness	Social Media	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics	Damage & Need Assessment	Imagery (UAV/Satellite)	Navigation	GPS									x										x										x				x						13 Redhum-LAC-Doc-Executive_Report-National_Consultation-Trinidad__Tobago-WHS-201504-20150430-DS-16361.pdf	"Pg. 3/10: In that regard exploring ideas of linking with social media and other community outreach endeavors such as religious and spiritual center newsletters and spaces where people gather to share information and community cultural events involving schools and education center were considered innovative possibilities to raise public awareness, knowledge and capacity as well as generally disseminate and increase access to important information.Pg. 6/10: Encouraging the increased widespread use of ICTs to keep communication lines in affected areas operational.Pg. 8/10: All Humanitarian Agencies should have an App • Telecommunication providers DIGICEL and BMOBILE should pre-install app. *Develop our own Social Media. (Localized – Similar to FB Whatsapp Instagram) – Known throughout the world. • Establishment of a website for DMU’s. • Creation of a special portal that all agencies can feed into."	Education/Awareness	Social Media	Communication	Mobile													x										x										x					x					20140530 IASC RN WHS Consultation_Summary Meeting Record (final).docx	"Pg. 8/14: Humanitarian effectiveness should be less about improving the response mechanisms and more about putting better early warning systems in place. Without early warning, effectiveness was limited. The focus on the Transformative Agenda belied the fact that early warning systems had the biggest potential for improving humanitarian effectiveness."	Early Warning	Mobile															x																	x													28 22_Multi_INGO_MFAT_23-April_NZL.pdf	"Pg. 6/10: Technology: o Cell connectivity: use/systemise it. There are many different systems - Digicel, Vodafone, etc - information needs to be consolidated. o There are good examples of community level HF & VHF radio communication systems in the Pacific that can be replicated. o To improve the speed and quality of imagery capture and management in a disaster, improve the use of drones/planes, photos, imagery management and distribution through the NDMO. Mark key assets with GPS points that can be located following disaster in the images.Pg. 7/10: Technology: o Using cell-phone based software systems to conduct assessments is one way to rapidly collect, analyse and disseminate data. This is being trialled with very good results."	Communication	Mobile	Communication	Radio	Damage & Need Assessment	Imagery (UAV/Satellite)											x															x													x		"2. Kuwait CS Consultation, June 9' 14_EN.pdf"	"Pg. 1/3: The use of modern technology in humanitarian response has increased, these help identify the locations and type of work needed when responding to a crisis. Resource allocation should be provided to equip humanitarian workers with such devicesPg. 2/3: The use of modern technology in humanitarian action such as satellite imaging and use of social media for effective communication and organising is being increasing used as a key tool. Modern technology is also used in various stages of humanitarian crisis such as the assessment, implementation and reviews."	Communication	Mobile	Damage & Need Assessment	Imagery (UAV/Satellite)	Communication	Social Media											x									x																					32 2a_INGOs_NDRF_Group1_19-Feb_NZL.pdf	"Pg. 3/6: 7. What new approaches or innovations have the potential to improve disaster response? • Mapping of countries that have high disaster risk (for example an 80% of cyclones), including village and resources are – layering with resources, prepositioned stock, volunteers, Civil Society groups etc. • MFAT have maps from NZDF of Pacific Countries that it could be shared with NDRF • Crowd sourcing, GSP, disaster mapping in Vanuatu – UNICEEF AKVO water and sanitation resources and what equipment communities have, in collaboration with NDMO and government • Mobile assessments – SMS codes for rapid assessments, but some scepticism around this • Pacific communities are powered by solar powerPg. 4/6: NZRC is currently developing technology for sending assessment data via a satellite modem • Drones for surveillance and delivery health supplies and vaccinations"	Build Resilience	Risk Management	Damage & Need Assessment	Crowdsourcing	Communication	Mobile	Supply	Drones									x																												x		39 33_Multi_PHT_Group1-5-May_FJI (2).pdf	"Pg. 4/5: xl. Pre-approved cyclone resilient designs need to be in place and widely shared. For public buildings, and also private homes. A challenge is also to get  builders/owners to comply as it usually costs more to build up to the standard of Cyclone Category 5 resilient – people succumb to temptation to cut costs or just do what they can afford.Pg. 4/5: Innovations: Use of uav/drones. Lack of regulations or outdated legislation. Should be reviewed. SPC used its drone in Vanuatu. SPC knew exactly where to go to get clearance. This information needs to be more widely shared, maybe a working group/task force.Pg. 4/5: Innovations: In Vanuatu, two of the clusters used SMART phones for data entry of assessments, others did not. Use of paper based assessment led to loss of time for data entry. Also, compatible software systems or one standard system should be in place."	Build Resilience	Risk Management	Damage & Need Assessment	Imagery (UAV/Satellite)	Communication	Mobile											x															x															40 33_Multi_PHT_Group2-5-May_FJI (3).pdf	"Pg. 4/8: • In Tonga and Vanuatu, UNDP has partnered with Digicell to rapidly recover communication infrastructure, send SMSs encouraging people to plant seeds, use SMS assessments to inform clusters’ recovery planning • Application of mobile technologies"	Communication	Mobile															x															x															47 40 Samoa CROP 11-05-2015_part2.pdf	"Pg. 6/8: Innovations can be found in areas such as remote sensing, geographic information systems, mobile technologies, data portals, etc."	Communication	Mobile	Damage & Need Assessment	Imagery (UAV/Satellite)													x																														5 Cananda report - THF - IR Canada.pdf	"Pg. /145: 3.4.6 Effective Innovations 3.4.6.1 Innovations with the biggest potential to improve disaster response • Mobile phones • The mobile phone: the ability to transfer funds from one place to another. • Localization of the response • Local innovations. Locally produced • Globalization has given us the ability to share everything. But one size doesnt fit all • Microfinance. Pg. 42/145: 3.6 Effective Innovations Innovations with the biggest potential to improve disaster response • Mobile phones • The mobile phone: the ability to transfer funds from one place to another. • Localization of the response • Local innovations. Locally produced. • Globalization has given us the ability to share everything. But one size doesnt fit all • Microfinance."	Communication	Mobile	Online Cash	Mobile													x															x			x												"60 64-65-66-67-Aus, Samoa, Tuvalu PNG report (separated by countries).pdf"	"Pg. 11/14: TRANSFORMATION THROUGH INNOVATION Transformation through innovation is important, as noting this helps understand models and its effectiveness. Models or ideas that are sustainable can bring about a major drive and commitment to invest. The proposals therefore should provide better communication, strategy, planning, and long term effectiveness. During the course of consultation stakeholder were interviewed to provide suggestions on new approaches or innovations that have potential to improve disaster response, which include: • Australia Red Cross- Survey and record location of elderly, disable and women. Tuvalu RC every year before Christmas communicates with the Ministry of Health nurses to get information and data about the vulnerable groups. However this data requires more location specific entry. • Tuvalu RC- Recording traditional knowledge of conservation of food, to preserve food during disaster is important and should be recorded. • Samoa RC- Recording traditional copying mechanism, and using these approaches during disaster. • The Tuvalu Red Cross is working with the Meteorological department (MET) on a FINPAC project. This project aims at conveying information regarding the weather, and early warning system using simple language to the residents. A survey has already been conducted and the second stage includes placing notice boards around the area of Teone, a small area to the north of Funafuti. Teone area is an informal settlement of people who have moved in to Funafuti in search of employment. The area is most vulnerable to disaster as it is location on a narrow strip, 1-2km wide with both sides facing the sea. Similar recommendation is also made by Samoa Red Cross, as it has been considered that translating technical language to communities is effective. Most effective mode of communication • Tuvalu RC- Mobile phones are recommended are an efficient mode of communication and awareness • Samoa RC- Making use of media as an effective means of communication for early warning system and disseminating information. Prepositioning of stocks before disaster. • Australia RC- Development of system for tracking spread of disease and epidemiology."	Communication	Mobile	Early Warning	Media	Early Warning	Data Analytics											x															x															76 7_CSO_10_Mar_FJI.pdf	"Pg. 4/6: 5. Can you suggest or recommend ways disaster assistance in the Pacific can be improved? • GIS system in every community through mobiles, computers o Reliable sources of data • The monitoring analysis shared extensively with key stakeholders from reflections of lessons learnt, especially after disaster • Monitoring to be carried out at regular consultations for shared learnings. • Create awareness, education to the household level, schools, from early childhood curriculum • Greater visibility of key local responders by regional and informational response agencies. • Designated centres in the community for education, centres for information • Good governance and greater transparency.Pg. 4-5/6: 7. What new approaches or innovations have the potential to improve disaster response? • Use of GIS, navigation system to all Pacific Islands. Use of solar power. • Community mapping of disabled; create community stats. Use of a colour system, visual warning for deaf. • Community mapping of most prone areas; create a database. • The use of early warning systems o Partnership with other actors eg Vodafone: use of SMS. o Social networks. • Training of communities in disaster preparedness: national, district, divisional, business houses o Include first-hand knowledge about disabled people. o Reflect on cultures, traditional knowledge to be valued, recorded and transmitted. o Invest and engage youth, including schools, so they can be first respondents in time of disaster (use of fun session, song, drama for school children). o To untie livestock. • Establish a safety net for community funding (reserve) • Develop mitigation approaches."	Alternative Energy	Solar Power	Build Resilience	Risk Management	Early Warning	Mobile	Communication	Social Media									x															x															ESA Preparatory Stakeholder Consultations.pdf	"Pg. 19/32: Information, Communication and Technology: A large number of stakeholders, 38 per cent of respondents to the regional stakeholder survey and 43 per cent of respondents to the private sector survey, agreed that there should be greater and wider use of information and communication technologies, such as mobile phones, internet, and social media in disseminating or improving humanitarian action, especially in communicating with communities. Data and information management were seen as key contributors to effective humanitarian action, for example by collecting and sharing needs assessments and conducting local capacity mappings. Stakeholders noted how in Madagascar a community-level text message system supported by national telecom operators provided both early warning and post-disaster rapid data collection within 48 hours. Better information collection was demanded, for example, on civil society organizations roles and capacities, with a suggestion from Eastern Africa to compile a ""Yellow Pages of NGs"".Pg. 20/32: se of traditional communication platforms: Although stakeholders from within the humanitarian community recognized the potential value of using new technologies to communicate, the large majority, of participants to the community consultations for Southern Africa identified more traditional methods as better forms of communicating with disaster- and conflict-affected communities. These included face- to-face communication, radio and television programmes in local languages, and the dissemination of information at community centres, such as city halls and places of worship. Stakeholders in Zimbabwe mentioned ""village criers"" as a method used in Eastern and Southern Africa to communicate and share information in remote communities. As another traditional information sharing system, Ethiopian stakeholders mentioned the verbal communication tradition referred to as Dagu, used by the Afar people. Stakeholders suggested that traditional communication systems should not be seen as a hindrance but an inspiration for improving knowledge exchange. They further suggested that new communication technologies could be developed hand-in-hand with oral traditions."	Communication	Mobile	Communication	Social Media	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics											x																														Tarrytown summary WHS comments.doc	"Pg. 4/5: A point was made on highlighting innovative achievements in the region in the regional consultation in Tokyo, Japan. The regional consultation could identify the kinds of innovation in the region, and use them as a platform for cooperation in research and development, capacity building, knowledge and best practices sharing and public-private partnership. Mobile technology is an example of innovation whereby real time data could be posted to enable authorities to mobilize action for to the affected people and communities. In the aftermath of typhoon Haiyan, data mining and crowdsourcing became a useful tool that was used in the humanitarian efforts."	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics	Damage & Need Assessment	Crowdsourcing													x										x							x													WHS MENA UN and INGO Roundtable_4 February'15.pdf	"Pg. 3/4: One way to innovate the current humanitarian architecture is to invest in managerial skills. New set of skills and competences need to be introduced in the discourse in order to tackle new humanitarian challenges.Pg. 4/4: Examples for successful innovation include the work of UNICEF in the Syrian crisis in developing different strategies to provide education such as providing Syrian children with computers for interactive learning in Lebanon and the implementation of a self-learning format to address the constraints that children face to access education by UNRWA."	Education/Awareness	Interactive Learning															x																														WHS NSEA Preparatory Stakeholder Consultation Report_2.pdf	"Pg. 8/12: Information: When asked what innovations had the biggest potential to improve disaster response, the most frequently selected answers (42 per cent) pointed to improved use of information and communication technology and better communication with affected communities. Moreover, lack of information on needs and gaps in response was identified by survey respondents as the biggest barrier that prevented them from initiating response.Pg. 8/12: What innovations have the biggest potential to improve disaster response? Improved use of information and communications technologies - mobile phones, internet and social media Better communication with and participation of affected communities in needs assessment/response planning Sharing and scaling-up local innovative approaches Improved logistics and delivery of assistance Implementation of accountability and feedback mechanisms involving affected communities More use of cash transfers and cash-based systems Better use of local markets and market mechanisms to source aid Adoption of new technologies such as drones, robots, 3-D printers and medical innovations 10% 20%Pg. 9/12: Use of mobile phones and SMS: Use of group SMS was suggested by many respondents as an efficient way for real-time data collection. An example of specific innovation in this field was provided by an NGO network, which had opened a mobile group chat during the Typhoon Haiyan response (Philippines, 2013-14) allowing for real- time group information sharing. Use of modern technology: While workshop participants frequently discussed the need for increased use of modern technology, such as mobile applications, information platforms, unmanned aerial vehicles and mobile devices, the adoption of new technologies yielded only 4 per cent of total responses for having the highest potential to improve humanitarian action."	Communication	Mobile	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics													x																	x													10 [URD_ALNAP] Quality in Humanitarian Actions_ Thinking Ahead.pdf	"Pg. 5/8: Though the place of crisis-affected people in the humanitarian system is a recurring issue for the sector, the development of new communication technologies could finally have a major impact in this area in the coming years; particularly by encouraging direct circuit aid from citizen to citizen and rapid feedback systems (via social networks, SMS, email, etc.)."	Communication	Mobile	Communication	Social Media														x														x															11 [WFP] Humanitarian Challenges_ Perspectives from the South and Islamic Countries.pdf	"Pg. 3/10: On the other hand, the conditions for delivering humanitarian aid and reaching out to populations in need of assistance have dramatically improved thanks to advances in technologies used for early warning, risk analysis and the delivery of humanitarian assistance. This includes electronic aid deliveries, which have made humanitarian aid more timely and appropriate."	Early Warning	Mobile	Build Resilience	Risk Management														x														x															"1. Bahrain CS Consultation, May 25' 14_EN.pdf"	Pg. 2/3: Strengthen ties with media and promote humanitarian action through social media.	Education/Awareness	Social Media																x								x										x				x							35 30_Multi_30-Apr_WSM_with comments.pdf	"Pg. 21/26: Response Agency Toolkit: The Samoa Disaster Management Office Training Toolkit for Response Agencies is a computer- based platform designed to provide Response Agencies with a series of planning tools to help prepare their personnel and agency systems for disasters and emergency events. It provides resources on how to develop an organisation preparedness and disaster plan and includes examples for public communication of disaster event information, data collection, situation reporting, and administration. It also provides useful external resources on international standards for relief management (Sphere), disaster planning, exercise management, and coordinated incident management systems. The Toolkit is being rolled out in Samoa through a series of one or two session workshops with each Response Agency depending on their individual agency needs.Pg. 21/26: Social Media: The Disaster Management Office is making use of social media approaches for communication with communities on disaster management. The DMO’s official facebook is being used to push information out to inform the public of any impending threats and other information that relates to safety, general preparedness and share information on the progress of a situation or response. However this page needs to be used more to promote the value of investing in disaster risk reduction through day to day work and major national and community development projects and programmes."	Early Warning	Social Media	Education/Awareness	Portal														x									x																			x	Innovation_ECHO_Summary.pdf	"Pg. 8/17: Index for Risk Management – InfoRM; tries to identify the countries at a high risk of humanitarian crises that are more likely to require international assistance. Different organisations expressed similar needs at the same time - the JRC took a role of bringing different actors together and stimulating collaboration on finding a solutionPg. 9/17: Innovation in WFP - a mainstreamed approach to ensure operations are relevant, efficient and effective at three levels: o Technical (how to do better what we already do? Development of new tools) o Programmatic (what are the new approaches to provide more effective solutions?) o Paradigm shift (transform the way an organisation does its work) • Examples of innovation: o Common delivery of multi stakeholder assistance o Capacity to adapt response (e.g. easily move from one transfer to another) o Bottom-up approach and local responses (solutions coming from the community and households; e.g. agriculture value chain for nutrition"	Build Resilience	Risk Management																x																													005-Key_messages.pdf	"Pg. 5/10: Though the place of crisis-affected people in the humanitarian system is a recurring issue for the sector, the development of new communication technologies could finally have a major impact in this area in the coming years; particularly by encouraging direct circuit aid from citizen to citizen and rapid feedback systems (via social networks, SMS, email, etc.)."	Communication	Mobile																	x							x					x								x								028-A Vision for the Humanitarian Use of Emerging Technology for Emerging Needs.pdf	"Pg. 3/37: The Red Cross and Red Crescent urges these actors to take note of the following five commonly shared requests from across the globe, ranging from the way technology solutions are introduced to the most desired humanitarian use casesInvest first in four emerging technology use cases that address actual barriers to resilience: • Wearable devices for providing early warning, supporting search and rescue, and reconnecting families • Unmanned aerial vehicles for temporarily restoring communications networks and delivering critical relief items, such as medicines, post- disaster • Smart home sensor networks for sensing and reporting fires in informal settlements/slums • Biometric scanners in ATM-like kiosks for restoring lost documentation to prove identity, access assistance and reconnect familiesPg. 4/37: Futurists and consumers agree that emerging tools like 3D printers, augmented reality software, biometric scanners, robots, smart cars, smart home sensor networks, unmanned aerial vehicles and wearable devices are sparking another technology revolution. The Red Cross and Red Crescent also believes that these emerging technologies hold the transformative power to strengthen the resilience of urban communities. Even more, these tools will be uniquely prepared to respond to emerging political, societal and environmental realities, enable new consumer behaviors and accommodate the increased complexity, scale and resources of cities.Pg. 7/37: Today, several ongoing initiatives—including those bringing connectivity and access to rural communities, providing early warning, administering cash grants, assessing risks and reconnecting separated families—have improved the speed, efficiency, reach, effectiveness, accountability, transparency, connection, knowledge and visibility of the humanitarian sector.Pg. 7/37: We also noted the importance of including different forms of technology beyond information and communications technology (ICT), such as robotics, manufacturing, medical and transport technologies. The emerging technologies of focus ultimately included 3D printers, augmented reality software, biometric scanners, robots, smart cars, smart home sensor networks, unmanned aerial vehicles and wearable devices as well as the increasingly diverse methods to power them and the applications tied to their effective use.Pg. 20/37: 3D printing has the potential to disrupt traditional manufacturing processes by allowing ordinary people to produce or customize physical objects. The disruption potential is analogous to the way digital audio files have disrupted the traditional music business, however, without many of the intellectual property or copyright issues as the legal framework for making copies of physical items is less regulated than that of music. Like the early days of the music industry disruption, there is already a healthy ecosystem of hobbyists at the community level that are innovating new 3D printing uses. Often congregating in community places called maker spaces, they are evangelizing the use of 3D printing in education and community development. They are also becoming income-generating assets for entrepreneurs, and communities are sharing the devices like others might share cars. 3D printers were only moderately attractive as resilience-strengthening solutions to community members and experts engaged in the dialogue. The most interesting use cases for 3D printers, according to dialogue participants, included the production of medical supplies, disaster-resistant structures and building materials; replacement of important items such as heirlooms, cosmetic and functional modifications to their homes; and making spare parts to maintain the other emerging technologies. Across the globe, there was great interest in adding a collection of humanitarian relief items to the digital library of open source designs for 3D printers as well.Pg. 21/37: Communities also acknowledged the potential of 3D printing to generate income for the users, which lowers the threshold for individual access. However, they also had concerns 3D printers may disrupt the existing local manufacturing economy, potentially resulting in job losses for community members.16 In addition to speed and economic impacts, participants noted several other issues that may prevent 3D printer adoption unless resolved in the next generation of products. Today’s machines are difficult to operate outdoors, especially when exposed to water, dust and winds, and they require regular maintenance and significant power. Participants also questioned the waste generated by the printers as well as their potential toxicity. These barriers must be resolved before their benefits can be fully realized by communities in disaster-prone, urban settings.Pg. 21/37: Participants in the Seoul, South Korea, workshop valued augmented reality software for crowdsourcing and visualizing community resources. The experts noted how mobile devices equipped with augmented reality software could be held in the user’s line of sight (similar to taking a picture) and display computer-generated billboards and bubbles on the screen that correspond with people’s homes and businesses, indicating those who are offering food, water, first aid and other services. This, they said, can be particularly helpful if the user is unfamiliar with the area, cannot see around the corner or is surrounded by high-rise buildings. The software would need to be updated regularly and provide near real-time information (generated by users) about fixed and mobile services as they become available and expire. During the dialogue, participants also envisioned augmented reality software as a helpful way to “see” where potential disasters could occur based on past events and current modeling, such as visualizing potential flood damage at specific water levels. This emerging technology could also help community members locate available resources post disaster and pinpoint people buried by a landslide or earthquake, saving lives and increasing the speed of recovery. Community members and experts were equally interested in augmented reality-based disaster simulation to aid their preparedness education. The primary barrier to accepting augmented reality software during the dialogue discussions, however, was simply unfamiliarity. Most participants had not seen augmented reality software in use and struggled to find the added value to distinguish it from accessing information from today’s Internet browsers and applications. As consumers continue to move toward a hands- free lifestyle and as more data becomes publically available, experts anticipate augmented reality software and the visualization of information will become increasingly relevant. Cost was not a significant concern of the dialogue participants given that any consumer expense would be limited to the purchase of a nominally-priced application. Augmented reality software was perceived by some dialogue participants as a potential invasion of privacy, although others noted that the data used would be limited to what was publicly available. Participants wondered if they would have to disclose information they collected using augmented reality software to their insurance companies or the government, especially if they identified vulnerabilities in their homes. The key to increasing interest in augmented reality software, according to the dialogue, is to simply make more applications that people can experiment with in their daily lives. This would make them more comfortable with the interface and more likely to consider a dual use in emergencies. Participants also requested that the information be available without Internet access.Pg. 22/37: Pg. 23/37: During the regional consultations, community members and experts were divided in their feelings about biometric scanners. Participants agreed biometric scanners would be useful tools to manage relief distributions and cash grants, find and reconnect separated families, and restore lost documentation. Community members appreciated that biometrics could help them fight false criminal accusations and prove their identity more immediately than DNA testing. Residents of Nairobi, Kenya’s informal settlements, in particular, envisioned that biometric scanners could help improve their living situation. With proof of identity, they could gain access to financial services as well as have a greater understanding of their community’s size and demographics to advocate for additional resources and responsive policies. That said, community members also noted some drawbacks to the technology, including potential abuses of power, privacy breaches and fraud. Some residents did not want to be tracked, traced or profiled by the government. In response, community members universally requested that a trusted, third-party manage and protect their data; neutral humanitarian organizations were recommended to serve as brokers. During the dialogue, participants also noted that if nongovernmental organizations play this role, data transfer protocols will need to be established between them and states to ensure national and international coverage. Others involved in the dialogue worried that if the system failed, they would be denied access and benefits. This was particularly true of those who may have cataracts or are missing fingerprints. Redundant methods of scanning would help reduce this potential and remove some of their concerns about using biometric scanners in the future, they noted. These and other discussions showcased relatively low levels of data literacy among the disaster survivors involved in the dialogue. Most of the community town hall participants, for example, lacked understanding of basic data principles and practices, and depending on mass media and other influences, they either expressed ignorance and vulnerability or suspicion and rejection of today’s data management systems. It is important to note, that regardless of their location in the world, people have an expectation of data privacy and security. Even if they are willing to trade on it temporarily post-disaster, we must not take advantage of their vulnerability.Pg. 24/37: Robots, for example, are already supplementing emergency healthcare. Highly contagious diseases, like Ebola, can spread rapidly in urban environments and the volume of medical needs can strain the healthcare system. To add to the complexity, there is already a worldwide shortage of trained healthcare workers. Responding to epidemics also puts healthcare workers at significant risk of infection. Robots, with video screens to display the faces and voices of human healthcare workers, can provide diagnostic support, treatment and monitoring of medical patients. They can also assist nurses and doctors in removing their personal protective equipment, in burying the deceased, and in comforting people who are suffering from stress and trauma. While people are in quarantine, robots may also deliver medicines, basic necessities and video communications from loved ones. Like other emerging technologies, robots also have an image problem—one manufactured by the entertainment industry. Robots were featured in radio, television and films since each was invented, and in popular books even before then. While robots have generally been portrayed positively, their negative roles are prominent. With the global reach of modern Hollywood, most urban residents have a mass media-influenced perception of robots’ capacity that often greatly exceeds their current capacity. That said, dialogue participants in Seoul, South Korea, were significantly more comfortable with and accepting of robots; some even owned household robots. There, government and commercial marketing initiatives had normalized these tools, set realistic expectations and overshadowed other influences. During the dialogue, community members and experts in other countries struggled to find the consumer value in robots based on their pre-conceived notions. They believed institutions, such as firefighting units and hospitals, would find greater benefit to their operations. They based this recommendation on the fact that most community members do not possess the skills or time to program and operate robots. They acknowledged, however, that their skill levels may evolve over time, similar to how they learned to use personal computers, mobile phones and social media as they were introduced. They also anticipated that in the future, consumer robots would have simple remotes or be controlled by applications on a mobile phone or tablet.Pg. 24/37: The most common use cases for robots to assist with strengthening urban resilience, according to the dialogue participants, included supporting telepresence, psychosocial counseling, medical treatment, search and rescue, and clean-up assistance. Robots were seen as having the greatest value add when the human user could not be somewhere because of financial or physical limitations. Robots, they said, must possess powers humans would not otherwise have to prove their worth, and they must display a real human face and voice to be trusted. The list of drawbacks, however, outweighed the participants’ nascent interest. Most could not imagine being able to own a robot, although in truth, some robots are no more expensive to own than a computer. Even the most expensive robots are on par with the cost of the most expensive unmanned aerial vehicles, and they could easily be shared or accessed through a fee-for- service model. They also raised concerns about the robots’ durability. Many of the robots that are under development by government and academic labs are still too delicate for everyday use. Commercial robots that assist with household chores are a bit more rugged, but they are also designed to operate indoors with limited stimuli, and many require direct human control to move about in real-world environments. Some also questioned the trustworthiness of robots, asking if they would betray the programmer/user. Others felt robots may pinch jobs from first responders and construction workers, and they did not want robots to become a substitute for human contact and knowledge. These barriers—ranging from perception and trust to technical abilities—will need to be addressed by developers before the average consumers will embrace them as helpful resources.Pg. 25/37: Smart cars hold interesting potential for strengthening urban resilience, in that they can also operate on sustainable fuel sources leading to positive environmental implications, expedite safe evacuations before and after emergencies, and receive messages and alerts based on risks in its surroundings. Dialogue participants also noted their ability to float in flooding disasters. Community members, who do not own or use personal vehicles, expanded the use cases to include making public buses (e.g., “matatus” in Nairobi, Kenya) smarter to increase their day-to-day safety and allow them to be utilized in a major disaster response. That said, smart car engineers have been cautious in considering their potential emergency applications given the technology is slow to develop and only just beginning to display signs of success. Overall, smart cars did not resonate with the dialogue participants. The most significant barriers centered on cost and liability. Today’s smart cars are typically more expensive than other models in the marketplace given their enhanced features. Some community members commented that since they did not own a car, nor expected to own one soon, that the technology did not seem relevant. However, they intuitively understood the smart bus concept and were proponents of public transportation adopting many of the smart car technologies. The next barrier will need to be resolved through policy. In many countries, drivers of semi-autonomous vehicles are held responsible if their vehicle hits another or causes another type of accident, yet responsibility for fully autonomous cars is still being debated. Policymakers have not decided if the driver, the manufacturer or the programmer will be held liable when a smart car causes injury or damage. The fear of litigation is strong enough to keep some dialogue participants from exploring smart cars. Finally, while smart cars can navigate autonomously, they perform best when a visualization of their intended path has been programmed into the onboard computers and is still accurate when the car is sent on a mission. Participants noted that after a disaster, when the landscape changes dramatically, updated maps would need to be available immediately to effectively utilize smart cars for a response.Pg. 25/37: Pg. 26/37: Community members were significantly more excited by the idea of a home or office building with sensors for fire, earthquake, gas leaks and even pollution, as opposed to the more convenience or entertainment-related use cases. They also preferred the use cases that involved disaster-resistant technologies, such as computer-controlled wind and water barriers that would protect a home’s interior from damage. They requested that these solutions be programmed to alert the building’s occupants and emergency responders when a risk presents. They also desired the smart homes to automatically take time-sensitive action, such as turning off the gas or bracing the roof for high winds. Some dialogue participants also saw the added safety benefits and would enjoy being able to assess disaster damage remotely and alert authorities in the case of an intruder. But they also saw several downsides, including the potential for security breaches or hackers taking over control of their homes. And most participants questioned the utility of these high-tech features for resilience-strengthening. They worried that the automation would lead to over reliance on computers, which would not likely work in an emergency. Community members also showed concern that they could erode traditional coping skills and make people “lazy.” Finally, they noted that disasters commonly disrupt electricity and homeowners would need alternative ways to access and operate in their homes during those periods. To make smart home sensor networks most helpful for disaster-prone, urban communities, developers will need to address these and other barriers.Pg. 27/37: UAVs also have an image problem. They are still closely associated with their military use, and are seen by some as weapons. As a result, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has issued guidelines on the use of UAVs in humanitarian efforts, discouraging their use in post-conflict settings.22 Still, UAVs have been well received throughout the dialogue. And although the issues surrounding them are becoming more complex, they are revolutionizing the options for data collection, trade and agriculture. Both community members and experts involved in the dialogue agreed on their value as quick delivery agents for high-value supplies, such as medicines, and the sky as a temporary supply route in early response activities, as UAVs could traverse terrain that might be impassable otherwise. They also appreciated their potential to supply lighting, power and connectively from the air until more permanent solutions on the ground can be restored post-disaster. One recurring theme from the global dialogue was UAV ownership. Community members did not express high levels of trust in government or private industry owning and operating drones for the public’s benefit. They were more comfortable with community ownership and management of UAV technology. With the rapidly decreasing cost and skills needed to fly UAVs, local community groups can and do own UAVs today, including disaster survivors in Haiti. Like 3D printers, robots and smart cars, UAVs were also considered ideal products for sharing economies.Pg. 28/37: Community members and experts all recognized the value of wearable technology transmitting location information, which could be used by first responders to find people and accelerate family reunification after an incident. They also envisioned wearable technologies assisting with medical triage and diagnosis; this use could also help prevent disease transmission if healthcare professionals can access the patient’s information remotely. Others expressed interest in wearable technology for their pets as well. Cost was not perceived to be a major barrier, given that wearable devices are among the least expensive of the eight technologies explored in the dialogue. Participants also stated that they had the most relevance in everyday life and met all of the other criteria for resilience-strengthening solutions. While the benefits far outweighed any concerns, dialogue participants noted a few barriers, which, if resolved, would increase their value immensely. Today’s activity trackers focus on movement, but do not give a full picture of the user’s health, which can lead to skewed priorities and outcomes. Additionally, computer-aided glasses can create a perceived or real barrier between the user and society as a whole. Participants noted that it is important not to eliminate all human interaction simply because technology does not require it; social cohesion is critically important to resilience. They also said that wearable devices could create additional distractions that impair driving and other activities. Participants noted that both glasses and trackers currently require smartphones and Internet access, which limits their disaster use. Some even expressed mild concern that, like mobile phones, scientists do not yet know the long-term health effects of wearing electronic devices. Lastly, these technologies also raised privacy and ethical issues for community members and experts alike. They agreed that they would like options for how their information is shared and with whom, noting they may opt in to sharing the information with the doctor but restrict government and insurance company access.Pg. 33/37: Wearable devices for providing early warning, supporting search and rescue, and reconnecting families post disaster Important preparedness messages and the early warning of disaster risks often arrive too late, are misrouted and overlooked, and sometimes they never arrive. Loss of life, injuries and property damage could be avoided with timely, accurate and actionable guidance. Mobile devices and push notifications have helped to close the gaps in recent years, but as consumer behavior changes and applications become more cumbersome, officials need to consider more effective ways to send and receive early warning to citizens, especially those who may have visual or hearing impairments. Additionally, when disaster strikes, people can easily become trapped in buildings or asked to shelter in place for a significant period of time. If left in these situations for too long, without food, water and medical care, lives will be lost. Families can also suffer psychological and emotional stress, if separated. During this time, first responders will receive an overwhelming number of calls for help, but it is nearly impossible to respond without GPS data and verification of the need. It is critically important the first responders prioritize and target their efforts, especially when resources and time are limited. Proposed solution: A wearable device that receives preparedness messages, early warnings and advice from officials; sends the wearer’s location and vital signs to emergency responders to aid in search and rescue; displays the location of other family members; and allows two-way communications with emergency responders and loved ones. The wearable device could be sold commercially to outdoor enthusiasts in order to subsidize at-risk communities’ use.Pg. 33/37: Unmanned aerial vehicles for temporarily restoring communications networks and delivering critical relief items, such as medicines, post disaster Telephone and Internet communications are a critical need in emergencies, and yet they are typically disrupted in major disasters. It can take several days and weeks to restore infrastructure and services, and during this time, few people have access to information, ways to contact their families and the tools they need to jumpstart their recovery. Natural disasters also can quickly and indiscriminatingly isolate communities, restricting ground transportation and access by first responders and suppliers. It is not uncommon for communities to become cut off from food, water, communications and health care in emergencies. And it can sometimes take weeks and months to clear debris, open roads and restore the flow of assistance. Proposed solution: A swarm of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) that transmit mobile and Wi-Fi signals using a mesh network for a localized area to restore critical communication for citizens. The aerial vehicles can hover in the air or land on tall buildings/mountains, and citizens can contact family members, employers and service providers via an application or SMS without overloading the system. Additionally, unmanned aerial vehicles can deliver small items, such as power sources, lighting, life jackets and medicines to targeted groups of people. The aim is to improve the response time for isolated and inaccessible communities, and the UAVs can be pre-tested and kept on standby for rental by community groups.Pg. 34/37: Smart home sensor networks for sensing and reporting fires in informal settlements/slums Fires regularly occur in urban slums, sometimes because stoves are used indoors, wires are faulty or residents are trying to keep warm. Rapid and haphazard development forces homes close together and allows fire to spread easily. Pathways between homes are narrow and often blocked. The density of the slum makes evacuations chaotic and dangerous. Residents commonly do not know who to call for firefighting assistance. And traditional firefighters, if they are even available, have a difficult time finding and responding to these fires quickly. Residents are therefore left devastated and homeless. Proposed solution: Low-cost, smart home sensors that are solar-powered and affixed to each home within the informal settlement. The sensors are networked to each other using radio signals and they can detect a fire early, distinguishing between smoke and fire, and sound alarms across the network via SMS and broadcast to alert nearby homeowners. They can also directly notify firefighters (or an informal brigade of citizen volunteers) and provide GPS data for the location of the fire. Armed with current maps, the firefighters can effectively reach the fires in time to save lives and property. This use case was particularly attractive to local entrepreneurs, who believed that homeowners and renters would be willing to purchase these safety devices outright.Pg. 35/37: Biometric scanners in ATM-like kiosks for restoring lost documentation to prove identity, access assistance and reconnect families. It is very common for families and businesses to lose personal documentation, such as identification, proof of residence or home ownership, insurance policies, and medical records, in an emergency. It is also nearly impossible to start the recovery process without this documentation. Even after government services and businesses have resumed, they may not reissue the documentation without proof of identity. Under these circumstances, disaster survivors can be left in limbo for months or years. Additionally, sudden disasters can cause families to become separated. Sometimes just across town and other times across borders. Not knowing where your loved ones are, if they are okay and when you will be able to reconnect can be incredibly painful. When the lack of communication and transportation makes it challenging for families to connect in emergencies, they turn to the Red Cross and Red Crescent for assistance. As people arrive at shelters, refugee camps and other safe places, they register their location, and the Red Cross and Red Crescent can consult multiple databases and resources to locate missing loved ones. Proposed solution: Solar-powered kiosks, at which people scan their fingers and eyes using biometric technology. In non-disaster times, the machines dispense cash like ATMs, and in emergencies, they can also be used to retrieve personal documents from the cloud storage and print replacement identification and other important documents (similar to self- service boarding pass kiosks at the airport). They may also be used to collect grants to restart businesses and locate family members who may have registered with the Red Cross and Red Crescent or another trusted organization. The kiosks would be owned and maintained by private businesses, such as financial institutions, or government agencies, and individuals could access them at no charge in emergency situations."	Early Warning	Wearable Devices	Communication	UAV	Early Warning	Sensors	Identity Management	Biometric Scanners	Supply	3D Printers	Navigation	Virtual Reality	Supply	Robots					x																												039-msf1yearebolareport_en_230315.pdf	"Pg. 20/22: Sierra Leone. Piloting began in January for a new electronic, tablet-based patient data management system in MSF’s Ebola treatment centres in Sierra Leone. The specially developed hardware is easy for glove-wearing, time-pressed medics to use. The tablet allows staff to access a patient’s history and collect more complete health data – such as pulse and respiration rates – to better track a patient’s progress and provide them with individually tailored care."	Damage & Need Assessment	Mobile																	x																												20150107_Preventing Corruption_Transparency Intl.pdf	"Pg. 72-73/196: A. Role against corruption New information and communication technology (ICT) offers powerful opportunities for increasing accountability and tackling corruption. It allows rapid data collection, access to information and innovative two-way channels for beneficiary participation. ICT empowers local communities to communicate their needs, feed into decision-making, report corruption, and monitor projects and budgets. Technologies such as SMS messages and web-based applications also promote transparency by providing information to beneficiaries, for example on their rights and entitlements. ICT enables automation, which can reduce corruption risks and help detection through the monitoring of networks and individuals. It provides secure complaint channels and enables deterrence, by distributing information about reported cases of corruption and messages promoting integrity. Innovative, user-friendly ICT systems can equip your organisation with meaningful data streams, enabling optimal quality and timeliness in your operational response. B. Implementation measures • Work with experts to review ICT innovations and corruption risks Hire specialist staff or consultants to harness and develop emerging technologies. Have an ICT policy outlining your commitment to using the internet, wireless networks, mobile phones and other technologies in innovative, evolving ways to detect needs, enable speed and scale of response and obtain real-time feedback. Work with ICT experts to spot and address the emerging corruption risks (not yet widely documented) associated with new innovations. • Be creative with ICT in programme implementation Map emergencies, assess needs and monitor projects via mobile apps and SMS reports from staff or, if there is no signal, data recorded by phone and later transferred to a computer. Work with the authorities and mobile phone companies to deliver SMS messages to affected populations. At registration, issue beneficiaries with bar-coded cards, which staff can scan using smartphones at the point of distribution and to update information without risking transcription errors. Create dynamic maps through geocoding – tagging activities with precise geographic information – so stakeholders can see projects and identify gaps. Publish aid information widely and compare planned projects with open data from governments, donors, researchers and non-governmental organisations. • Develop two-way channels to enhance community participation Use SMS and internet-based technology to inform beneficiaries (for example, emergency preparedness messages and information on aid entitlements) and enable their participation in programme delivery (for example, needs assessment, monitoring and complaint mecha- nisms, etc.). Collect crowd-sourced data using video, audio, touch-screen quizzes, global positioning systems and SMS messages. Train community members to use online crisis- mapping, needs assessment, budget-tracking and monitoring tools. Work with local media to help gather real-time information from affected populations, and monitor local people’s postings on social networks such as Facebook. Cross-check the authenticity and accuracy of user-generated content. • Ensure sensitive information is secure Minimise ICT security challenges: for example, to prevent whistle-blowers being identified or  to stop messages being intercepted. Use ICT such as smartphones to train staff in digital  security, including training them to assess risks and to maintain secure data storage. Avoid  plain-text messages in countries with SMS monitoring programmes, particularly if users  might be under surveillance. Check whether governments force operators to register mobile  phone SIM cards and their users, or require identification for purchasing a SIM card. Ensure  anonymity where sensitive information is being communicated. • Collaborate with other agencies and sectors Arrange systematic collaboration with other agencies and sectors, to harness and develop  rapidly evolving ICT innovations. Take part in humanitarian sector initiatives to create the  best technology and practices: for example, a centralised dashboard to manage emergency  responses. Avoid duplication of effort, conflicting data standards and cluttered information  banks. Join communities of open-source software developers, create and use free open- source tools and share programme information online. Collaborate with the private sector to  obtain additional intellectual and material resources. You’ll need • The right infrastructural environment – for example, reliable electricity or network coverage – and back-up plans in case this infrastructure becomes suddenly unavailable (such as  portable solar chargers) • To assess the political and anti-corruption context before deciding which ICTs to use • For some uses of ICT, an enabling political environment that protects free speech • Strong understanding of end users’ ICT needs, motivations and existing patterns of use Challenges • Greater decentralisation of humanitarian action resulting from ICT, which further entrenches  local power-holders • Government efforts in some countries to control the development and use of ICTs • Ensuring people without access to ICT aren’t excluded from your communications • Verifying the accuracy of data and images"	Transparency	Mobile	Transparency	Portal	Transparency	Workflow	Communication	Mobile	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics	Damage & Need Assessment	Crowdsourcing	Privacy 	Information Seciruty					x																												2 FINAL Innovations in Emergency Disease Responses.pdf	"Pg. 10/43: Disease Diagnostics and Assessments: From TB Tests to the Wild Wild West Activities falling into the category of diagnostics and assessments involve identifying the communicable disease threats faced by vulnerable populations, especially those with epidemic potential, and using a variety of methods and tools to define and measure the health status of the population in relation to these threats. In emergency settings, the fundamental requirement is for quick, effective and cheap tests that can be deployed with minimal or low levels of technological and training requirements. There have been a number of examples of such tests being developed and subsequentlyPg. 11/43: deployed in humanitarian responses. Perhaps the most significant of these in recent years has been the rapid assessment for tuberculosis (TB), both typical and multi-drug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB). Tuberculosis is a leading cause of morbidity and death worldwide, with approximately two billion people infected and approximately two million annual deaths attributable to it. The vast majority of these cases (95%) and deaths (98%) occur in low and middle-income countries.14 TB is recognized as a major cause of mortality in humanitarian crises, especially in complex emergencies that are the focus of the majority of humanitarian expenditure, but there are considerable challenges to correctly identifying and treating TB in emergencies.15 The issues around treatment will be discussed later on (see section 3.5) but here the focus is on diagnostics. Unlike HIV and malaria, the other two major killers in developing countries, there was until very recently no rapid diagnostic test for TB. The most commonly used diagnostic involves taking multiple samples of sputum from suspected carriers, and applying microscopic analysis to identify the presence of the TB bacterium. This method, which is over 125 years old, is cheap but is subject to human error. It is also not effective for all types of patients - in particular, children, patients with MDR- TB, or who also have HIV-AIDS.16 The lack of rapid diagnostics is widely seen as contributing to the global caseload for TB, because of the high levels of undiagnosed and therefore untreated cases. Although efforts were made to strengthen laboratory capacity to diagnose these patients, the cost has been prohibitive in many settings. These challenges also extend into treatment, and have meant that many humanitarian organisations have traditionally chosen not to implement TB programmes,17 focusing instead on more obvious and treatable diseases such as diarrhoeal diseases, measles, acute respiratory infections and malaria. However, in recent years, a number of agencies had taken up the mantle, and sought to overcome the challenge of delivering TB programmes in emergencies. This meant searching for better diagnostics, as well as meeting a variety of standards for treatment and care. The rising level of concern amongst humanitarian agencies was not, however, the major driver of the development of a new test. Instead, there was significant campaigning and concern raised in the wider public health arena, which led to a sustained attempt to select and develop a new solution for TB testing. This invention process was largely initiated and conducted outside of the humanitarian sector, initiated by the public-private partnership, FIND, in 2006, working in collaboration Cepheid, a leading US medical diagnostics firm, and the laboratory of Professor David Alland at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey. Additional financial resources came from the US National Institutes of Health. The stated aim was to develop a rapid diagnostic molecular test, which would not be subject to human decision-making and therefore less prone to error. It was also intended for use in detection of drug-resistant TB, and for TB in HIV-AIDS sufferers. 14Desikan, P (2013) Sputum smear microscopy in tuberculosis: Is it still relevant? Indian J Med Res. 2013 Mar; 137(3): 442–444. 15Grange, John Metal (1999) Paradox of the global emergency of tuberculosis, The Lancet, Volume 353 , Issue 9157 , 996 16 WHO (2006) Global tuberculosis control. Surveillance, planning, financing. 17 Biot, M, CHandramohan, D and Porter, JD (2003) Tuberculosis treatment in complex emergencies: are risks outweighing benefits? Trop Med Int Health. 8(3):211-8.Pg. 12/43: After an intensive three-year development and testing process, a new molecular test, known as Xpert MTB/RIF, received accreditation by the EU as an approved diagnostic. The test underwent demonstration trials in a number of laboratories around the world, and was found to detect 92.2% of TB, including 73% of those cases that were negative with the traditional microscopy test. In comparison to the microscopy method, the new test was fully automated and not as susceptible to human error. It also identified both the presence of TB and resistant TB. While this initial trial process was vital for the initial validation of the test, there was a need for further trials if the test was to be used in developing countries. Specifically, despite the positive results, there were still questions about the utility of the test in a variety of low resource settings, including humanitarian emergencies. The original demonstration tests had been conducted in ‘near ideal’ reference laboratories. In order to test its efficacy away from such settings, FIND led a major trial of the test in health facilities in resource poor settings, with a specific focus on measuring the operational feasibility and effectiveness. A humanitarian agency, Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), was one of the collaborators. This study, published in the Lancet, assessed adults with suspected TB or MDR-TB in South Africa, India, Peru, Azerbaijan, the Phillippines and Uganda. The trial compared the Xpert MTB/RIF results to microscopy results in laboratories adjacent to the study sites, and also undertook a validation test using culture analysis. Covering some 6648 participants, the trial found that the test detected 90% of tuberculosis cases, compared with 67% for microscopy. It was also not significantly lower in patients with HIV co-infection, unlike the microscopy results. The results were also available within a matter of hours, rather than days for microscopy. For those cases that tested negative on microscopy, the use of the MTB/RIF test reduced median time to treatment from 56 days to 5 days. The test was also found to be usable outside of conventional laboratories because it was self-contained and did not require specialized training. These findings were published in 2009 and 2010, and subsequently validated in leading medical journals in 2010, following which a recommendation was made to the WHO to approve the test for use globally. The WHO's Strategic and Technical Advisory Group for TB took up the mantle in September 2010, reviewed the evidence and held a global consultation, before making a policy recommendation in December 2010 for Xpert MTB/RIF to be used as the initial diagnostic test in suspected TB cases, especially for cases of MDR-TB or HIV/TB. The initial recommendation anticipated that the test could lead to a three-fold impact in diagnosis of MDR-TB and doubling of TB/HIV diagnosis.18Pg. 12/43: 18 Cohen, D & Corbett, E (2013) Evidence supports TB test, so what now?[editorial]. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2013Pg. 12/43: 19 MSF (2012) Implementation new test increases diagnosis, Press Release, November 2012Pg. 13/43: as Zimbabwe, where there was a quadrupling of cases diagnosed, and Swaziland, where the delay to treatment was reduced from 66 days to 14 days (79% reduction). The conclusion of this round of tests was that the MTB/RIF test could be used effectively in a range of emergency settings to simplify patients access to early and accurate diagnosis, thereby potentially decreasing morbidity associated with diagnostic delay, dropout and mistreatment.”2020Boehme, Catharina C et al. (2011) Feasibility, diagnostic accuracy, and effectiveness of decentralised use of the Xpert MTB/RIF test for diagnosis of tuberculosis and multidrug resistance: a multicentre implementation study, The Lancet, Volume 377 , Issue 9776 , 1495 - 1505Pg. 13/43: By June 2013, 88 countries around the world had procured 1,402 GeneXpert instruments and over 3 million of the test cartridges were being used by the public sector and NGOs under the concessional pricing structure.22 According to Mario Raviglione, director of the WHO Stop TB Department, ""This is a game-changer for TB and MDR-TB [multidrug-resistant TB] care delivery. [We have seen] innovation happening in real time - scientific evidence rapidly translated into policy, policy quickly adapted into practice, and scale-up significantly accelerated by innovative funding mechanisms effectively addressing cost and affordability."" This is perhaps the most successful recent example of innovations in diagnostics in emergency disease responses. It reveals some interesting features of the innovation process, and by extension, the supporting innovation ecosystem. While this was an innovation that has been used in humanitarian contexts the humanitarian sector was not the main instigator of the innovation process. Some recognition of the problems and opportunities around TB testing did indeed take place in humanitarian settings, this was not sufficient to trigger a process of selection and invention. Instead, the development of the test happened in a separate innovation process, involving public health campaigns and advocacy, public-private partnerships and commercial entities.Pg. 13/43: 22 WHO (2013) GeneXpert GuidePg. 15/43: The Ebola outbreak has led to search and development of new, quicker testing equipment. The new testing machines can now diagnose in one hour rather than the original six. The new machines retail at £39,000 and have already been purchased in bulk across many hospitals across the US, following an accelerated approval process by the US Food and Drug Administration. This saw a remarkable reduction in the time for approval, with the machine being passed in October 2014 after a few months of analysis, rather than years which is more typical. However these machines retail at $39,000 and are more likely to be of benefit to developed countries in order to further strengthen domestic responses to Ebola. Indeed, none of these machines have to date made their way to West Africa.23 The operational conditions for the Ebola response are such that a faster test result though important, is not the only important test of a new innovation. Because of the virulence of the virus, there are additional requirements for testing, specifically the need for protective gear for testers. Both WHO and CDC recommend should include impermeable gloves, footwear, eye and face protection, protective clothing and resistant masks. A new humanitarian product will need to deal with – at a minimum - the timing issue, the need for accuracy, the need for protection of testers, and the lack of testing capacity. A number of different organisations, from the WHO, Wellcome Trust, USAID, US FDA and FIND (who were involved in the rapid TB test) have encouraged and incentivized the search and development of new rapid tests in the most-affected countries. Such incentives include provision of protocols and standards that new tests should meet. For example, the WHO and FIND have worked together established a target product profile for rapid simple tests that can be used in the control of Ebola, and have also generated an inventory of products currently available.24 This product profile sets out everything from the diagnostic methods to specifying the conditions in which any new test must be deployable, and the skill requirements for implementing the tests. The collaboration has also developed guidance for the procurement of biochemical materials for use in the tests. This can be viewed as a vital strategic input into the search and development process. Some donors have also supported the development of new products. Wellcome Trust and DFID, through ELRHA, have funded the development of a new 15 minute test to be trialed in Guinea. USAID have funded an innovation window on Ebola, working with the design company IDEO, working on a range of issues from improved diagnostics to health-worker protection though cheap but effective suits.Pg. 15/43: 23 Pollack, A (2014) Researchers Seek Crucial Tool http://www.nytimes.com/2014/11/05/business/ebola- researchers-rush-to-find-a-fast-diagnostic-test.html? r=0  24 WHO / FIND (2014) Target Product Profile for Zaïre ebolavirus rapid, simple test to be used in the control of the Ebola outbreak in West Africa http://www.who.int/medicines/publications/target-product-profile.pdfPg. 15/43: Some donors have also supported the development of new products. Wellcome Trust and DFID, through ELRHA, have funded the development of a new 15 minute test to be trialed in Guinea. USAID have funded an innovation window on Ebola, working with the design company IDEO, working on a range of issues from improved diagnostics to health-worker protection though cheap but effective suits. This rapid investment has led to the emergence and flowering of a diversity new ideas and technologies for diagnostics. For example, there are some tests that work without the need for refrigeration, while some focus on improving accuracy without the use of the PCR method. Others seek to provide a mobile ‘lab in a suitcase’, while others take account of safety requirements. The sheer number of products that are appearing means that careful trials are urgently needed, along the lines of what was used in the TB case.Pg. 21/43: One ongoing and tested innovation in this area is the collaboration between the World Health Organization and the Philippines Department of Health in 2010, to develop a mobile-technology based early warning disease surveillance systems for post-disaster situations.36 This approach, called SPEED, has subsequently been deployed in every major emergency to hit that country. The Philippines is located in a region that is highly vulnerable to typhoons and earthquakes, and has been described as the most disaster-prone country in the world. Despite the devastating effects of calamities, there is no efficient and fast health information tool in the country to track and monitor the casualties of disasters, and their health status. During a particularly devastating series of typhoons in 2009, lack of reliable data and information systems compromised the affected communities in terms of prevention, health reporting and response. This situation saw a turning point in in 2009, in response to Typhoon Ketsana. This was the most devastating typhoon ever to hit the capital city of Manila and resulted in the largest ever leptospirosis outbreaks anywhere in the world.37 Subsequently, the Global Outbreak Alert Response Network of the WHO identified the need for an effective monitoring system for early detection of unusual increases in major public health events during emergencies in Philippines. The World Health Organization, in collaboration with the Philippine Department of Health, USAID, AusAid and the government of Finland worked to create the Surveillance in Post Extreme Emergencies and Disasters (or SPEED) tool for infectious disease preparedness and response.38 The basic principle of SPEED is the use of web-based software technology to receive data via SMS from all parts of the country. This data can be aggregated and used at different levels and different regions. The frontline component of the Philippines disaster response structures are local disaster evaluation areas, and health workers operating in these areas play a critical role in populating SPEED with data. SPEED reporting forms, loaded onto mobile phones and tables, enable the capture of essential information during consultations with members of affected communities. The system is set up to undertake surveillance and monitoring of 21 identified disease entities or health events that are common in emergencies or disasters.39Pg. 21/43: The surveillance information gathered in the reporting form is the entered into the SPEED system using mobile SMS messaging. All the information is stored in the national SPEED server, allowing aggregated data to be viewed by and analysed by health managers, regional, and national decision-makers. The system allows online data validation and automatic generation of necessary reports. This enables the rapid transmission of a range of syndromic disease information from local evacuation centers to national levels of the health system. The system allows online data validation and automatic generation of necessary reports. Users can also create graphs, spread-sheets and maps to support early warning and decision-making about 36Surveillance in Post Extreme Emergencies and Disasters (SPEED) (2014) Website: http://www.wpro.who.int/philippines/areas/emergencies disasters/speed/en/  37 Amilasan AT, Ujiie M, Suzuki M, Salva E, Belo MCP, Koizumi N, et al. Outbreak of leptospirosis after flood, the Philippines, 2009. (2012) Emerg Infect Dis Volume 18, Number 1—January 2012 38 SPEED Brochure (2011) SPEED Brochure, WHO and Philippines Department of Health - Health Emergency Management Staff 39 Health Emergency Management Staff, DOH and WHO Philippines (2011) SPEED Operational Manual for ManagersPg. 22/43: possible disease outbreaks and feasible responses. The system also has a built-in capacity to alert users if certain diseases go beyond specific epidemic thresholds. Since 2010, SPEED has been used in a number of disasters, including after Typhoons Quiel, Washin, Haiyan and Ruby. The largest single deployment was after Typhoon Haiyan in 2013, which led to serious concern about possible disease outbreaks. Aid resources were directed to the Department of Health to enhance emergency disease surveillance systems, including resources for deploying SPEED. For the initial four months of the Haiyan respinse, SPEED was implemented in 411 health facilities in the affected areas. Over 300 staff were trained in the use of SPEED by the WHO, UNICEF, IMC and others; and over 340,000 consultations were reported, generating approximately 3000 SPEED early warning signals. Every single one of these signals led to responses to prevent possible outbreaks, ranging from specific health treatments, stockpiling of drugs and advocacy efforts. In 2012, SPEED won a national award as one of the “best examples of the highest level of innovation in the country’s health marketplace.”40 The award, funded by the Rockefeller Foundation, called SPEED trailblazing as one of the first early warning disease surveillance systems that has genuine nationwide coverage. As the Philippine government states: “...The aim of the system was to determine early and potential disease outbreaks and monitor disease trends. It has contributed immensely in reducing preventable deaths and diseases by enabling timely and appropriate response by local government officials...” 41 The counter-example for surveillance is not failed innovation process, but instead the lack of dissemination of the SPEED approach across countries. This does need to be qualified: SPEED has been scaled up nationally at the behest of the WHO and the government, and has been deployed in multiple emergencies, which is clearly an example of scaling. However, it has not been directly disseminated to any other countries. The independent review of SPEED conducted for Ausaid found that it was: “very relevant to other countries and international agencies. While such a comprehensive effort would probably not be successful in countries with relatively low human and capital resources, there are many countries where it could be a viable model. Even in low-resource countries, the technique of SMS-based health reporting deserves consideration.”42Pg. 22/43: What would have been needed for such dissemination? The humanitarian innovation ecosystem would need to have some means by which to take the protocols of SPEED and apply them to other equivalent settings, along with some of the critical lessons learned in the Philippines. The reality, however, is that the ecosystem has few incentives or capacities for doing such work without additional support. Expecting this may be a little like asking an emergency responder to help reform building standards codes. A small thought experiment is instructive here: had SPEED been developed solely by the humanitarian sector, one can easily 40 St James Aquino, Y (2012) Disaster surveillance system wins award for health innovation, US Medical Tribune, 41 Ausaid (2013) Post-Disaster Surveillance in the Philippines: An External Review 42 ibidPg. 23/43: In the SPEED case, as with the previous positive ones, there was a central importance of actors outside the humanitarian sector – private sector, national governments, local governments, community-based organisations and national health providers – in helping to join the dots in the humanitarian innovation ecosystem. Were it not for these external actors, the system would not have been the success it has proved to be.Pg. 23/43: In 2005, a new single virus vaccine (known as monovalent) was found to be effective in many cases, without running the same risks of viral interference. Because of this new vaccine, the time between doses could be reduced to 1-2 weeks, and population immunity can be built up more rapidly. This is of particular importance when there are new outbreaks, in emergency settings where it is necessary to achieve a high level of immunity in a short time, or in situations where security and access means that the population is difficult to reach and immunization cannot take place in a predictable and regular fashion. This new approach was called the short interval additional dose approach, or SIAD for short.44 The programmatic benefits of SIADs were first established in its successful application in Somalia in 2006. Somalia had managed to eradicate polio in 2002, but it became re-infected in44 Global Polio Eradication Initiative (2010) The Short Interval Additional Dose (SIAD) - An intensified campaign approach to deliver monovalent Oral Polio Vaccine (mOPV) Implementation GuidePg. 24/43: 2005 by polio originating in Nigeria. The campaign was severely constrained by ongoing and entrenched conflict across the country, which was regularly ranked as the most dangerous and insecure country in the world. Thanks to the work of a team of national volunteers and health workers who visited every household in every settlement multiple times, 1.8 million children under 5 were vaccinated. The WHO, in announcing the eradication of polio in Somalia, stated that it was enabled in large part because of the innovation of SIAD, which meant that infants in insecure areas could be immunized multiple times in a short time period.45 The success in Somalia led to the SIAD approach being established as a core eradication strategy in those countries still subject to Polio outbreaks. However, while the strategy was persuasive from an operational perspective, the scientific basis was not well established. The Polio Research Committee approved a clinical trial in Egypt in 2010, and Pakistan in 2012, to assess the efficacy of SIAD. These trials have shown that population immunity could be more rapidly enhanced through SIAD.46 The positive outcomes of these trials informed subsequent decisions to roll out SIAD in Syria, where the ongoing conflict saw a polio outbreak in October 2013, the first in the country for over 14 years. Eventually reaching dozens of cases, and spreading across the border to Iraq, the outbreak was referred to by the UN as the most challenging outbreak in the history of polio eradication. Access restrictions and a highly mobile population were compounded by the challenges of high insecurity inside Syria and damaged health infrastructures. The initial UNICEF-WHO strategy for responding to polio in Syria included SIAD as an innovative vaccine delivery approach that should be applied in Syria and the surrounding countries. The strategy highlighted the need for multiple doses in short time periods, the mobilization of community resources (as in Somalia), effective communication messages about the SIAD approach to share with communities, and negotiated access to hard-to-reach populations.47 This was launched in December 2013 as the largest ever vaccination campaign in the Middle East, with plans to reach 25 million children across seven countries in the region, with more than 2 million inside Syria. At the time of finalizing this report, the WHO announced that there had been no new cases in Syria for a year, in large part because of the success of the SIAD strategy.Pg. 24/43: The response also saw a unique event in August 2014, where a number of operational health agencies convened a regional forum during the ongoing response to review innovative strategies for limiting the transmission of polio. This was led by WHO, and brought together officials across multiple agencies and countries, specifically to deal with the outbreak that had been declared a public health emergency of international concern. A key theme of the meeting deliberations was the use of existing innovations in mapping, surveillance, and control measures, with a particular focus on new medical and communication technologies.Pg. 24-25/43: The best counter-example to the success of SIAD is to be found in the Ebola response. Good outbreak control means an effective package of interventions, from case management surveillance, treatments, and social mobilization. All of these were apparent in the Syria polio 45 WHO (2012) Somalia Polio Eradication Initiative Website http://www.emro.who.int/polio/countries/somalia.html 46 Global Polio Eradication Initiative (2010) Evaluating SIAD, The Polio Pipeline, Winter 2010, Issue 5 47 WHO-UNICEF (2013) WHO/UNICEF Strategic plan for polio outbreak response 24effort. However, almost none of these were present in Ebola, meaning that Ebola outbreak control was always going to be weaker than for polio. However, there were particular failures inherent to the relative novelty of the disease and its emergence in urban settings for the first time that highlighted the challenge of innovation in outbreak control. The information [resented below is based on the state of play in the Ebola response at the time of writing (November 2014-Januray 2015). The key focus of the Ebola outbreak control was on reducing human transmission, and focused on risk reduction messaging for affected country populations. This focused on factors such as reducing possible new infections from wildlife-to-human transmission, reduced human-to- human transmission through hygiene and protective equipment, containment measures such as safe and prompt burials of the dead, contact tracing and containment of sick individuals in quarantine. There was also a set of challenges around controlling outbreaks in healthcare settings through adequate precautions, from hygiene to protective gear. In many cases, however, these strategies promoted by the international community have not been targeted in a strategic fashion.Pg. 25/43: As an MSF briefing published in December 2014 noted, the outbreak control efforts by the international community were “sluggish and patchy, falling dangerously short of expectations.”48 While there were multiple issues around staffing, facilities, and so on, a particular challenge highlighted was the widespread inadequacy of international actors to flexibly respond to changing circumstances with appropriate and relevant strategies. As a result, “resources are being allocated to activities that are no longer appropriate to the situation”.49 This finding can be seen as closely linked to the operational innovation capacity of the sector as a whole.Pg. 25/43: 48 MSF (2014) Ebola Response: Where Are We Now? MSF Briefing Paper 49 ibid 50 Teng, JE etal (2014) Using Mobile Health (mHealth) and geospatial mapping technology in a mass campaign for reactive oral cholera vaccination in rural Haiti. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Jul 31;8(7)Pg. 25/43: Disease management: technology for incremental change, facing resistance to radical improvements Disease management involves the diagnosis and treatment of cases promptly with trained staff using effective treatment and standard protocols at all health facilities. As already noted, in 2013 in Haiti, the response to the cholera outbreak of 2010 led to a number of technological innovations in the response. One in particular which did lead to a positive contribution to the disease response was led by the NGO Partners in Health and a number of local organisations, in collaboration with medical researchers. It involved the deployment of a mobile technology based health system for management of treatments for 50,000 participants in two communities. The system was deployed as part of a reactive oral cholera vaccination (OCV) campaign during the ongoing epidemic.50 The core of the mobile health innovation was a tablet computer based information managementPg. 26/43: system combined with geospatial mapping technology. With software developed for use on 7- inch tablets that could be easily deployed to the field, the operational teams pre-registered participants and distributed vaccine cards with unique barcodes to treatment-eligible residents during a census in February 2012. First stored on the mobile devices, the data was uploaded nightly via Wi-fi to a web-hosted database. During the treatment campaign between April and June 2012, residents presented their cards at vaccination posts and their barcodes were scanned. Patient data from the census were pre-loaded on tablets to auto-populate the electronic form. Nightly analysis of the day's community coverage informed the following day's treatment strategy, and generated case- finding reports allowing identification of those who not yet vaccinated. During 40 days of the programme, the team collected approximately 1.9 million pieces of data. A total of 45,417 people received at least one OCV dose; of those, 90.8% were documented to have received 2 doses.51 Although the platform required up-front financial investment and training, it reduced the need for paper registries and manual data entry, which would have been costly, time-consuming, and was known to increase error. Using Global Positioning System coordinates, the team was able to map treatment posts, and link these to population size, and subsequently vaccine coverage to understand the reach of the campaign. A follow-on study showed that the use of mobile health technology in the OCV campaign allowed timely creation of an electronic registry with population-level census data, and a targeted treatment strategy in a dispersed population. It was concluded that the use of mobile health should be strongly considered in cholera treatment campaigns in future initiatives.52 This particular innovation is noteworthy because it is a process innovation, which sought to enhance the effectiveness of an existing protocol. Such innovations can, it would appear, be effectively managed within the humanitarian innovation ecosystem.Pg. 26-27/43: What the system does do well is incremental innovations, which are no major challenge to practices or assumptions. However, more radical approaches to treatment are not always easily accepted. This of course needs to be understood in context: incremental and radical innovations are both necessary. But at the moment, there seems to be less support and scope for more radical, game-changing innovation efforts. Some of the barriers are professional or institutional. There are historical examples of radical innovations in treatment being resisted by the sector, often on the basis of existing medical knowledge and practice. For example, in the 1980s, the rise of TB cases in refugee camps was seen as problematic, but existing knowledge suggested that TB treatments should not be contemplated in such inherently unstable situations. As one researcher notes, “it took several bold individuals and several controlled trials to establish beyond doubt that TB could be treated in refugee settings, even in rather unstable conditions. These previously controversial practices are ... (Remaining results omitted due to excel limitation. See online charts.)"	Damage & Need Assessment	Rapid Diagnostic	Early Warning	Mobile	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics	Communication	Mobile																																							Cooking-in-the-Congo-North-Kivu-Tech-Assess.pdf	"Pg. 15/52: Solar power has the potential to be widespread in North Kivu. In the far north of the province, in Beni and Butembo, domestic solar systems are currently supplying electricity to a significant percentage of the population. Solar systems are, in most cases, only used for lighting and basic electric devices, such as TV, video or music players, as well as to charge phones and back-up batteries. New enterprises offering complete equipment with installation are emerging in areas where potential consumers are concentrated. Solar power can offer reliable electricity with low main- tenance if the equipment is meant for this purpose.Pg. 17/52: Hydropower is a very promising option for meeting the energy needs of communities in the region, as well as for creating jobs. However, it is important to recognize that hydropower may have negative consequences in some cases, such as downstream social impacts, forced population displacement due to construction, or loss of cultural heritage assets. These risks must be taken into consideration when considering the scale-up of hydropower projects and then continually monitored.Pg. 6/52: • Biomass briquette (the “donut” briquette) projects have been implemented by numerous humanitarian actors in North Kivu since 2008. Projects have proved to be effective in reducing acute energy crises in IDP camps and reducing environmental pressure on natural parks. However, no project has reached economic viability or has set up a self- sustaining mechanism. • There have been several challenges regarding imported stoves distributed in IDP camps in North Kivu. Other urgent needs (e.g., lack of food) forced some IDPs to sell their stoves. The types of fuel that IDPs gather in the surroundings of the camp (leaves, corn cobs, small branches and plastics) are not appropriate for a fuel-efficient firewood stove. • Based on the testing of new charcoal fuel-efficient stove models in Goma, there is still room for tech- nology improvement. The new Femmes du Solei stove is a promising model, proving to be higher performing than the most popular model Jiko Nguvu Nyeusi. It has also received positive feed- back from cooks."	Alternative Energy	Solar Power	Alternative Energy	Hydro Power																																							x				Final Report May 2015.pdf	"Pg. 22-23/58: Actively searching for new users for feedback and new partners for ideas is vital for search and discovery. This tends to happen in very limited ways at the present time, at the margins of the system. But it can happen. Positive examples include the development of the national mobile- based disease surveillance system in the Philippines, which came about because of the engagement between the WHO country office and the Ministry of Heath, which then generated a network of actors working together to develop the surveillance system, test and deploy it, and 21take it to national scale. The role of the humanitarian sector was in providing finance, capacity and training. However it is worth noting that the existence of diverse networks does not always lead to effective search and discovery efforts. The opportunity or potential for new ideas from such networks is clear, and there are numerous examples of the global shelter community of practice, such as the Crisis Mappers network and ISCRAM in technologies for crisis response. But there is always a further challenge to ensure the creative energies of such groups are effectively harnessed in pursuit of specific innovation challenges."	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics	Communication	Mobile																																											FullDraft_WDR2013_Confidential.pdf	"Pg. 6/110: In Syria, for example, digital data collection tools were adapted and are now used to serve as a commodity tracking system, monitoring the distribution of supplies as they are transported and delivered by local partner organizations in areas that remain inaccessible to international humanitarian agencies. The system improves efficiency and accountability and helps deliver life-saving supplies. In the Philippines, the government used social media to help prepare for Typhoon Pablo. It created information pages accessible from mobile phones to help locate - dis- aster shelters and other assistance. It also created and promoted the use of a Twitter hashtag for the storm, #PabloPH. Tweets from the population were later mapped to provide the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs with early damage assessment information. Technology is also central to improving early warning systems, whether it is the World Food Programme relying on cell phone-based short text messages (SMS) to monitor food prices at market, or the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization improving drought monitoring and forecast systems for sub-Saharan Africa.Pg. 6/110: Despite these challenges, the responsible use of technology in humanitarian action offers concrete ways to make assistance more effective and accountable, and to reduce vulnerability and strengthen resilience. Distance learning and online education are good examples of technology supporting these goals.Pg. 8/110: New ICT tools for humanitarian action are proposed with the potential o detect needs earlier and predict crises better, enable greater scale, speed and efficiency of response and assistance delivery, enhance the specificity of resource transfers to match needs of communities at risk, and increase accountability and trans- pa-r  ency. Technologies offer new sources of information and early warning, and new platforms for training or raising awareness and funds (OCHA, UN Foundation and Vodafone Foundation, 2011).Pg. 8/110: Tools that foster data gathering and communication with affected communities are very rapidly expanding. These include: • Crowdsourcing, which is the process of “obtaining needed services, ideas, or content (e.g. data) by soliciting contributions from a large group of people, and especially from an online community, raher than from traditional employees or suppliers” (Merriam-Webster). • Big data, or big data analytics, which are the range of tools and methodologies that use advanced computing techniques to leverage largely passively generated data, for example those resulting from the use of cell phones or social net- works, and the active collection of observed data by satellites for example to gain insights for decision-making purposes (Letouzé, Meier and Vinck, 2013).• Crisis mapping, which “leverages mobile & web-based applications, partici- patory maps & crowdsourced event data, aerial & satellite imagery, geospatial platforms, advanced visualization live simulation, and computational & sta- tistical models to power effecive early warning for rapid response to complex humanitarian emergencies” (Crisis Mappers).• Digital data collection which is the process of replacing traditional assess- ments conducted with pens and papers by data collection supported by digital devices such as smartphones. This results in substantial gains in terms of speed and quality of the data.Pg. 9/110: The rise of humanitarian technology is also the result of technology fusion or “the integration of information network, mobile technology hardware and appli- cations, and social media and mapping platforms into a readily available single mobile device such as a laptop, a mobile smartphone, or a tablet with access to unlimited amount of data from multiple sources and in multiple formats (big data)” (Pham and Vinck, 2012).Pg. 10/110: In Rwanda, for example, the government recognizes that broadband is the oxygen of an effective digital economy. Young entrepreneurs, women and men, are working in the digital tech sector with a focus on digital inclusion, citizen empowerment and creation of local content. It is a model that could – and should – be replicated across the world. Mobile technologies, particularly cell phones, are now considered an essential tool for public health workers. They are used successfully to gather, collate and transmit data by front-line health workers. Patients are using apps to monitor their diabetes or heart conditions. Health ministries are runnin g effective awareness campaigns on issues such as the effects of alcohol, smoking and other lif- e-style-related contributors to the growing epidemic of non-communicable diseases. In places like Nigeria, the Red Cross is using SMS technology to provide fast and cheap real-time data, strengthening the national health system and greatly improving community engagement an the ability to prevent and treat illnesses.Pg. 10/110: Mobile phones are also a tool that can significantly contribute to achieving real gender empowe--r ment. Women make up 40 per cent of the global workforce yet relatively few work in the technology sector. Mobile education programmes for technology skills designed for women can address the future labour gap in the tech sector and strike a blow for real equality and economic empowerment.Pg. 11/110: Efforts in other fields of practice that have similar but distinct needs may also be a source of humanitarian technological innovation. A good example is digital data collection which has largely emerged from the health and social sciences, but has direct applicability for humanitarian data collection. Other examples include social media and education platforms whose original goals are not to serve humanitarian purposes, but which are especially well suited to enhance humanitarian action.Pg. 11/110: TABLE 1.1 Examples of technological innovations for use in humanitarian actions Humanitarian action phases Selected action Selected technological innovations Big data analytics for early warning, including social media, satellite imagery, etc. Advances in computing Text messages and social media warning systems Open data, access through social media Resource databases and social networks Online distance learning platforms and discussion platforms, mail lists Mobile platforms Social media campaigns Big data analytics Information sharing platform Mobile and digital data collection Satellite imagery, aerial photography, unmanned aerial vehicles Crowdsourcing information Micro-tasking Secure data transmission and encryption Long range data transmission Resource mobilization through social media Mobile cash transfers Commodity and resource tracking through mobile phones SMS-based feedback from affected people receiving aid Resource management platforms Matching needs and volunteers through social media Reunification through social media Search and identification through ‘digital signature’ (e.g., cell phone SIM card)Pg. 12/110: Systems like IVAP provide a multitude of benefits in addressing urban displacement crises. IVAP removed the guesswork in planning for the size, locations and needs of urban IDPs in Pakistan. The inclusion of phone, address and local community informant information made it possible to locate urban IDPs for both assistance and future profiling, making them less ‘hidden’. In addition, the profiling data have been used to understand various vulnerability profiles among the population and understand how to maximize the impact of limited humanitarian resources by targeting assistance to those most vulnerable to specific threats. While the concept of profiling and databases is not new to the humanitarian community, the innovative ele-ment of IVAP is the scale, quality and depth of data made possible through the use of technology. By using smartphones, surveyors were able to profile an average of 10 to 15 families a day in urban locations. Paper was not used, so surveys could not be lost and no data entry was required. Phones were programmed with specific rules for each question (i.e., age must be between 0 and 105 years) and automated skip patterns were used to ensure that relevant questions were asked to the appropriate people and that all required questions were answered. The database was set up to check for duplications automatically (when the same IDP had been interviewed more than once) and to auto-analyse the data for complex vulnerability criteria, such as female-headed households with more than four children living in a specific slum. Having this single database allowed organizations to have a shared understanding of needs. The possibilities for similar profiling systems are almost endless, such as IDP or refugee registration, joint agency assistance tracking by family or individual, or information sharing with displaced populations via mass SMS systems utilizing the database. Additionally, an IVAP-like system does not need to be owned or run by one organization, but can be used across humanitarian actors. Each actor can borrow the configured smartphones, use their own staff to profile families in the locations where they are working and then send the data back to the shared database.Pg. 13/110: Google has a unit devoted to information access in disaster settings (Google Crisis Response). It created, for example, the Google Person Finder in response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake. In 2012, the processing of thousands of Twitter messages that included images and videos of damages from Typhoon Pablo in the Philippines enabled the rapid creation of damage assessment maps.Pg. 14/110: challenges remain in terms of advance preparedness for disasters and the capacity to process such large volumes of information. Advanced computing solutions can help respond to these challenges – they include human-driven processes, such as crowdsourcing and micro-tasking, and machine-driven methods such as data - min- ing and machine learning which go beyond the processing capabilities of humans.Pg. 14/110: Education researchers Bill Cope and Mary Kalantzis (2012) have described the ways in which technology transforms the economy of efort in education, enabling us to afford (both literally and figuratively) not only to make learning available anywhere, anytime, but also to provide learners with formative assessment and recursive feedback as they work. In this economy of ‘new learning’ (see figure), learners use technology actively to construct knowledge, designing meanings using multiple media at their disposal. By working together collaboratively, every learner is also a peer and teacher contributing to collective knowledge and intelligence that can be used to further thinking and action as well as encouraging ‘metacognition’ (thinking about thinking). Unlike education in the industrial age, which levelled ‘one-size-fits-all’ assump-ti ons, new learning can afford to differentiate based on pre-existing knowledge, competencies and skills.Pg. 15/110: The success of the first-aid app has resulted in several important developments. The British Red Cross has launched a baby and child first-aid app and work is under way to develop an app focusing soely on the UK’s chief disaster threat: flooding. Internationally the Everyday First Aid approach has had wide acclaim from across the Red Cross Red Crescent Movement, bringing simplicity while retaining scientific accuracy. The American Red Cross have licensed the app from the British Red Cross and gone on to develop a suite of additional apps to cover a range of emergencies. Since the British and American Red Cross released the app, many other National Societies have asked to use it. Unfortunately, development costs make the creation of a high-quality app difficult, if not impossible, for many National Societies. However, in order to make simple first-aid skills available at a global level, the British Red Cross has worked with the IFRC’s Global Disaster Preparedness Center on the concept of a ‘universal app’ that would enable every Red Cross Red Crescent society to launch an app in their country, at a lower cost than it would take to create one from scratch. The opportunity brought by mobile technology has the potential to put life-saving skills in the hands of millions.Pg. 17/110: The ‘World map of UNESCO’s points of interests’ project aims to create a free, open and web-based world map through citizen’s participation (crowdsourcing) with the objective of strengthening both the resilience of local communities and the response of UNESCO and global organizations to post-conflict and post-disaster situations through an openly licensed GIS data infrastructure. The project focuses on developing assessment tools and mapping relevant sites or data in the targeted areas by using locally available ICT infrastructures, including mobile connections, internet, tablets, TV and radio.Pg. 24/110: Enabling Syrians to use YouTube, Skype and other online tools has been a useful way for people inside Syria to organize, coordinate and respond to their own problems, and for outside actors, particularly when humanitarian access has been so limited, to try to ascertain need and organize and provide humanitarian assistance.Pg. 24/110: “These tools are amplifying the capacity of disaster survivors to find resources and to find what they need to get them out of whatever situation they’re in,” says Wall. “Whether that’s being able to call a family member to dig them out or res- cue them in a boat in a flood, or the capacity to connect immediately to someone overseas who might be able to send money, or family reunification, or being able to just pull a community together to respond really fast” (Wall, personal commu- nication, 2013).Pg. 25/110: Data collection projects based on cell phone technology have become very popular, and often use a ‘crowdsourcing’ approach in which anyone with the interest and ability can send an SMS message to a central platform. The Voix des Kivus project chose to use ‘crowdseeding’, i.e., it selected villages through random sampling and identified specific reporters in each village. These were given mobille phones, credit and training, and were invited to contribute to the system. This approach has three benefits for data quality. First, people can participate that otherwise would not, particularly in areas such as the DRC, where the crowd may be small: many live in hard-to-access villages and lack a cell phone or the funds to send an SMS. Second, by selecting a random sample, the information received is representative of a wider population. Finally, there is reduced scope for faking reports. A crowdseeding system builds a relationship with the reporters, increases incentives to report truthfullly and offers the opportunity to verify reports.Pg. 25/110: In Sierra Leone, where 60 to 70 per cent of the 6 million residents are connected via cell phone, the IFRC has launched the Trilogy Emergency Relief Application (TERA) project in collaboration with local telecom providers. TERA allows the Sierra Leone Red Cross Society and IFRC to target specific cell towers around the country, sending humanitarian information via SMS to communities in crisis, allowing the agency to connect instantly with affected communities about floods, wildfires and disease outbreaks.Pg. 27/110: In addition to advances in technology, it is necessary to continue to use and support more traditional methods of information and communication, such as community radio stations. Their crucial role is under-acknowledged, however, and funding for them is very limited.Pg. 28/110: Sinsai.info is the Japanese version of Ushahidi, an open-source crowdsourcing platform that was originally created to document and map eyewitness reports of violence after the 2007 Kenyan pre- s- idential election. It was also used after the 2010 Haiti earthquake where survivors texted requests for assistance, which were in turn translated, organized and mapped by a team of volunteers in Boston (Heinzelman and Waters, 2010). Sinsai.info was launched four hours after the earthquake, and volunteers manually geo-tagged and mapped more than 12,000 reports mostly from Twitter feeds using OpenStreetMap and satellite imagery provided by the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency, categorizing them into types of resources such as evacuation shelters, open food stores, gas (petrol) stations and cell phone charging centres (Katoh, 2011; Inoue and Seki, 2011). It also mapped requests for assistance from survivors stranded at nursing homes and hospitals.Pg. 28/110: But mobile giving is not only a Western innovation for disaster response. In fact, it has caught on equally fast, if not faster, in low- and middle-income countries. Pointing to the Haiti earthquake, the GSMA’s Reid says mobile money trans- fers also flowed from diaspora communities who could give directly to friends and relatives.Pg. 31/110: Social engagement has brought about a fundamental shift in the way people engage with each other and with organizations. It has also changed the way the American Red Cross does bus- i- ness: the Red Cross has committed to making social engagement part of its operational DNA, impacting outreach to the public, engagement with disaster-affected communities and operational decision-making processes.Pg. 32/110: After Hurricane Sandy hit, the New York-based Kallidis began spe- nd- ing time in local disaster zones, talking to residents, volunteers, local organizations and aid managers. What she saw was an amazing desire and energy from communities themselves to become problem-solvers, but a lack of organization and streamlined process to put people and skills to good use. From this experience Kallidis created a mobile application called Jointly, which helps connect people affected by disaster directly with volunteers who can help. The start screen invites users to ‘get help’ or ‘give help’. Moving forward through the appli- ca- tion, people can select the specific help they need or skill they have, and then put a call out to get connected.Pg. 33/110: The Central African Republic is one of the United Nations’ 34 least developed countries and faces endemic crises, corruption and inexistent infrastructure. In 2012, Internews and its local partner, the Association of Journalists for Human Rights, launched a crisis map in partnership with Ushahidi (a non-profit software company) and OCHA to gather real-time, first-hand information from pop- u- lations across the country through an enclosed network of trusted local media organizations and community correspondents.Pg. 38/110: The digital disaster response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake signalled the coming of a new force in the humanitarian space. Volunteers from The Fletcher School at Tufts University launched a live crisis map that detailed some of the damage and resulting needs following the earthquake (Morrow et al., 2011). They popu- lated this map with information from social media, mainstream media and text messages. In parallel, volunteers from the Humanitarian OpenStreetMap com- munity used satellite imagery to create the most detailed street map of Haiti ever made, which also depicted the location of humanitarian infrastructure such as makeshift camps for internally displaced people.Pg. 38/110: This remarkable response was in many ways made possible by the launch of ‘Cri- sis Mappers: The Humanitarian Technology Network’ just three months before the devastating earthquake. Many of the volunteers who were instrumental in the digital disaster response were already connected via Crisis Mappers. The net- work’s list-serve played a pivotal role in facilitating rapid information sharing throughout the disaster response phase.Pg. 38/110: This additional experience highlighted the need for a Crisis Mappers Standby Task Force, which was launched in late 2010. Later renamed the Standby Volunteer Task Force (SBTF), this initiative resulted in a more prepared and proactive network of trained digital humanitarian responders. Today, however, the SBTF is only one of several digital volunteer networks each with different or overlapping areas of specialization.Pg. 40/110: OCHA recognized the value of an interconnected ecosystem and thus led the launch of the Digital Humanitarian Network (DHN) in April 2012. The DHN’s purpose is to serve as the offiicial interface between highly skilled volunteer networks and the humanitar- ian organizations that wish to use this latent surge capacity during disasters. As a result, formal humanitarian organizations are increasingly working in partner- ship with DHN.Pg. 43/110: Perhaps one of the most important developments with respect to humanitarian innovation in information management among formal humanitarian organization is the American Red Cross’s Digital Operations Center, launched in partnership with Dell on 7 March 2012 (Meier, 2012c). This is the first social media centre devoted exclusively to humanitarian and disaster relief efforts.Pg. 43/110: Sentiment an- aly- sis was also used in response to the Haiti earthquake by analysing the general mood reflected in the SMS sent by the disaster-affected population. This type of analysis provides an important feedback loop vis-à-vis the general reaction of the affected population – be it a reaction to a disaster or a humanitarian intervention.Pg. 44/110: For example, USAID has innovated the concept and prac- tice of ‘crowdseeding’ for the digital collection of information in conflict zones (Van der Windt and Humphreys, 2012). This approach uses mobile phones and random sampling methods to collect representative data via SMS from conflict zones.Pg. 44/110: OCHA is also looking to innovate in the mobile space, proposing to develop a smartphone app for humanitarians in the field to “check into and out of” a disaster area. This novel use of technology seeks to facilitate emergency contact manage- ment and aid coordination during emergencies.Pg. 45/110: Meanwhile, the European Research Center for Information Systems (ERCIS) at the University of Muenster in Germany has partnered with the European Union’s Joint Research Centre (JRC) and its Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System (GDACS) to develop an innovative mobile technology solution for the web-based portal. GDACSmobile, as the smartphone app is called, is novel in several respects and most importantly with regards to the technology’s use of ‘bounded crowdsourcing’ for the rapid collection of crisis information (Meier, 2013a).Pg. 46/110: The field of ‘advanced computing’ has developed two ways to manage big data: human computing and machine computing. The former uses crowdsourcing and micro-tasking platforms to distribute tasks that are easily completed by a ‘crowd’ of humans. In contrast, the latter uses automated data mining and machine learn-i ng to manage tasks that are more difficult or virtually impossible for humans to complete. Both approaches can be used to manage the big crisis data challenge and the related problem of verifying user-generated content.Pg. 46/110: SyriaTracker is one of the longest-running crisis maps. It depicts human rights abuses that have been committed for more than two years now. To collect rele- vant information, the project uses both human computing (crowdsourcing) and machine computing (data mining).Pg. 47/110: Recent research in advanced computing has also empirically demonstrated that disaster tweets c- on- taining non-credible information spread very differently than credible tweets do . In fact, the credibility of disaster tweets can be predicted with relatively high levels o  accuracy simply by monitoring how they spread across Twitter (Castillo, Mendoza and Poblete, 2013). The same is true for fake images shared on Twitter (Meier, 2013b). The team behind AIDR is therefore exploring whether the platform can also be taught to look for non-credible information such as rumours. While the QCRI’s ultimate go al is to develop a functional, free and open-source AIDR platform, these early research and development (R&D) efforts are, for now, purely experimental. That said, this is - pre- cisely the kind of dedicated R&D in next generation humanitarian technology that is needed to equip humanitarian organizations and digital humanitarian networks with the technologies needed to leverage big crisis data.Pg. 53/110: Advances in high-performance computing and the availability of a large number of computers in the cloud (a network of remote servers) have made it possible to compute more complex models for hydrological and seismological risks. This allows decision-makers to make better-informed decisions sooner about which areas to evacuate.Pg. 57/110: With the use of technology, the biggest costs of participating in a training course – travel and loss of time from work – can be avoided (TechChange, 2013).Pg. 60/110: In 2005, the release of Google Earth, a free, easy-to-use geospatial product aimed at the average computer user, revolutionized the field of geospatial information. A few months earlier, Google had released Google Maps, a web-based mapping tool, which other web sites could integrate. Humanitarian workers quickly started employing Google Earth and Google Maps to create their own simple-to-use situational awareness tools. The use of geospatial-based situational awareness tools, which had previously required substantial investments and were restricted to large response agencies in high-income countries, now became available to users all around the world.Pg. 63/110: Tools that enable people to share the information they read within their own social networks create an opportunity for the message to ‘go viral’. One of the most successful awareness-building campaigns that went viral was the KONY 2012 campaign, which focused on raising awareness about the war crimes of Joseph Kony, the leader of the Lord’s Resistance Army, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and northern Uganda. Through a well-coordinated social media campaign, the organizers were able to get more than 97 million peo- ple around the world to view a documentary about Kony’s war crimes (Invisible Children, 2012).Pg. 69/110: Japan is working on the development of tough, mobile biped robots that can tolerate such inhospi- i- table environments and be used in future disaster situations. Once such robots have been perfected, commercial production will be necessary to ensure sufficient robots are ready to be deployed when disaster strikes.Pg. 74/110: By the same token, such industries are likely to engage in extensive government lobbying, with the goal of encouraging the procurement of rebranded ‘humanitarian’ products and the inclusion of such products on the international policy agenda. A pertinent example is the rise of the ‘humanitarian drone’. Drones offer the humanitarian community a range of po- ssi- bilities with regard to crisis mapping, search and rescue, and, in the future, cargo and relief drops. Hence, humanitarian organizations will soon begin to engage in discussions about the politics and logistics of prcuring drones. Meanwhile, drone vendors are struggling to expand their markets by identifying and lobbying for new, humanitarian uses for their products. In light of criticism from activists and the news media, the drone industry is also investing in rendering humanitarian drones acceptable to the general public.Pg. 83/110: A number of things worked well in the immediate response in Haiti. For example, a complete mult i lingual version of Google Person Finder was operational within 72 hours of the earthquake and led to the formation of the Google Crisis Response team. Ushahidi, in conjunction with Tufts University in the United States, provided a platform for crowdsourcing via the 4636 SMS Shortcode and plotted nearly 4,000 distinct events. GIS mapping allowed layered and detailed satellite maps to be created. These maps included accurate and up-to-date information pertaining to the situation on the ground. Some things did not work as well, however. These included the seemingly useless public health messages sent out by the 4636 SMS Shortcode system. Recipients considered that these SMS lacked personal relevance.Pg. 83/110: The use of electronic medical records (EMR) in disaster response was reported in detail in the response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake by two different field hospitals: the field hospital in Fond Parisien, managed by the Harvard Humanitarian Initiative (HHI), and the mobile field hospital set up by the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) and deployed on a football field in Port-au-Prince.Pg. 83/110: HHI Operational Medicine Institute at Fond Parisien used an existing iPhone app, designed originally in the United States for domestic inpatient ward use, installed on responders’ personal phones. The IDF deployed three full-time staff to establish and maintain a wired and wireless network of hospital computers, barcode scanners and mobile digital X-ray machines. Each of these groups reported on the benefits gained in census tracking, patient identification and efficiency and continuity in delivering care (Levy et al., 2010; Callaway et al., 2012).Pg. 83/110: A particular strength of EMR systems in disaster response, as highlighted by IDF hospital staff, is in overcoming language barriers. Data collection can be done in a language familiar to local staff and affected populations, and the results easily converted to the language of the responding agency (Leaning, personal commu- nication, 2013). EMR systems are becoming commonplace in medical informatics in high-income countries. Disaster responders from these countries can quickly introduce such familiar systems into the local disaster-affected situation. The parallel concern, however, is that deploying such a system creates a high barrier to entry. Local caregivers must own a smartphone and be computer-lit- erate. The EMR can only be integrated into existing systems if these also have such capabilities. These requirements risk widening the gap between responder and local providers, inhibiting the integration of locally trained staff in response efforts and preserving the existing distance between international disaster medi- cal response and national health systems.Pg. 84/110: Geospatial data – especially when converted to understandable maps – have proved useful during the first stages of response operations. Satellite imagery supports the geographic information management of a disaster by providing data related to the extent and severity of damage, ge- o- physical characteristics of the area, most severely affected locations, access routes and population settlements.Pg. 91/110: The use of satellite technology to inform a crisis map has proved powerful but problematic, as the HHI’s Satellite Sentinel experience has shown (HHI, 2012). An apparent fact picture separated by 24 hours may mask important interim changes on the ground or the area outside the perimeter of the satellite image may harbour risks that are not anticipated or ascertainable because of the pre-de- termined GPS grid for the next photo. Pg. 93/110: The next phase in humanitarian technology is harnessing machine learning, artificial intelligence, to find meaning in big data. The leaders in using machine learning and artificial intelligence to glean useful information from unstructured data began in the private sector, but have now moved into the humani- ta-r  ian space.Pg. 93/110: A barrier to the utility of new digital methods in humanitarian crises is a mistrust of crowdsourced and other non-traditional data Yet, the digital volunteer com- mu- nity is leading the way in rigorous fact checking. Social media in disaster scenarios often provide a mill for rumour and speculation (Meier, 2011), so perhaps the most interesting development is the potential to use crowdsourced open data from social media itself to combat the spread of unfounded information in crisis situations.Pg. 101/110: the Mexican Red Cross created a tool, Mega V, to make the verification process more efficient and rapid. A digital bar-code scanning tool was created that could be used to quickly scan and verify the recipient’s status, rather than manually reviewing registration documents. The change was immediate and revolutionary, with a reduction of the validation process... (Remaining results omitted due to excel limitation. See online charts.)"	Supply	Data Analytics	Education/Awareness	Mobile	Damage & Need Assessment	Social Media	Early Warning	Data Analytics	Damage & Need Assessment	Crowdsourcing	Communication	Mobile	Online Cash	Mobile																																	HIE Case Study 2 - Health.pdf	"Pg. 18/43: 2012 also saw a large-scale humanitarian malaria prevention program, consisting of intermittent distributions of anti-malaria medicines, run by MSF in Mali and Chad. Anti-malaria medicines were administered to approximately 175,000 children between three months and five years of age in Koutiala District in southern Mali and in two areas of Moïssala District in Chad. This was the first time MSF had carried out a large-scale SMC program, and was one of the first large-scale applications in humanitarian sector as a whole. In Mali, MSF teams observed a 65 percent drop in the number of malaria cases in the weeks following the distribution of treatment. Additionally, the number of malaria-associated hospitalizations fell from an average 247 per week to 84. In southern Chad, results were equally encouraging; in two health zones in Moïssala, the decrease in the number of malaria cases was between 72 percent and 86 percent, compared to cases recorded in the weeks prior to the first SMC distribution29. According to Dr. Estrella Lasry, a malaria specialist at MSF, further evidence of feasibility was essential for further scale-up: ""this prevention strategy could be an extraordinary public health tool, particularly for protecting children, who accountfor the vast majority of malaria deaths. We can draw on our projects in Chad and Mali to assess the feasibility of employing this strategy in other contexts.” The methodology has not proved to be a magic bullet, however. It is increasingly being requested in settings where there is year-round malaria, but SMC has not been found to be effective in such contexts, nor have there been equivalent preventative methods developed. In other settings there may be high levels of resistance to specific antimalarial drugs, making the treatment ineffective. Moreover, SMC itself can also contribute to a rise in drug-resistant malaria if it is implemented without close monitoring. As Lasry noted: “the bottom line is that there is no optimal drug, highlighting the challenges of designing an appropriate prevention strategy for this context—yet leaving the sense that it’s essential to make some trade-__offs and devise the best possible strategy with the limited tools at hand.”30 Since this time, SMC has seen remarkably rapid approval across the humanitarian sector. The 2013 inter-agency handbook on malaria control in emergencies, published by a group of health- focused UN agencies and NGOs, citing SMC as “particularly useful during the post-acute phase or during chronic emergencies in sub-Saharan Africa, as it requires minimal specialist knowledge and can be administered by health staff.”31 This case study is one which shows the innovation ecosystem working remarkably well, with a rapid turnaround from application of approaches, evidence being generated, piloting in 28 WHO (2013) Seasonal Malaria Chemoprevention: A Field Guide http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/85726/1/9789241504737_eng.pdf 29 Lasry, E, et al (2012) Seasonal malaria chemoprevention: a new player in the malaria control arena, MSF Paper 30 Lasry, E (2013) Seasonal Malaria Chemoprevention: Good News in a Year Marked by Malaria Emergencies, PLOS Blogs, 25th April 2013 31 WHO et al (2013) Malaria control in humanitarian emergencies – An inter-agency field handbook. Second editionPg. 1/43: Executive Summary This study seeks to analyse and explain how innovation works in emergency communicable disease responses. It does so through use of the concept of an innovation ecosystem’ the set of factors and actors that come together in ways that might foster or inhibit effective innovation processes. It looks at innovations across the range of activities involved in communicable disease responses in emergencies, and seeks to better understand the ecosystem by reviewing both positive examples, where innovations have emerged and been successful, and more challenging examples, where innovations have not happened, or where they have not been successful. By looking across such contrasting examples, the study aims for a rounded picture of innovation in emergency disease responses, highlighting both the strengths and the weaknesses in the system. There have been some notable successes, amongst them the development of new diagnostics for TB, or new approaches to prevention, for disease surveillance, and treatment and management. There have been successful innovations within crisis responses, such as the response to polio outbreaks in Syria. But there are also notable failures include ineffective utilization of innovations in rapid responses such as Ebola in West Africa, and cholera in Haiti. The study reveals an innovation ecosystem that is good in certain parts, and at certain times, but which is heavily reliant on a number of critical internal actors, and on external capacities and resources. Moreover, the ecosystem is far from systematic, and is not always well suited to the nature and dynamics of emergency work.Pg. 30/43: The work of the R2HC, a stable-mate programme of HIF managed by ELHRA, has started to make a contribution to addressing these gaps, but the programme is relatively small scale, and in the early stages. One promising development has been the mobilization of a specialized call for research in response to the Ebola crisis, a number of which have focused on research around new and innovative approaches to analysis, modeling and managing community relations.Pg. 13/43: With the evidence in place, the next barrier was around scaling up the use of the test across countries where TB was a major problem, and by operational aid agencies in such settings. However, this led to an issue of access to the test: the test was not initially affordable for many governments and humanitarian organisations. In August 2012, a public-private partnership announced between the United States President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), UNITAID, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. This arrangement, which was to remain in place until 2022, allowed for a drop in price of the test cartridges from over 40% from $16.86 to $9.98, specifically for use the public sector of 145 high TB burden and developing countries plus NGOs and other non-profit agencies operating these countries21. The role of UNITAID as am innovative financing mechanism focused on enhancing access to disease-focused innovations in is of central importance here. UNITAID has also recently supported the development of point-of-care diagnostics for HIV-AIDS, which have also been trialed in humanitarian programmes, with evidence still being produced at time of writing. By June 2013, 88 countries around the world had procured 1,402 GeneXpert instruments and over 3 million of the test cartridges were being used by the public sector and NGOs under the concessional pricing structure22. According to Mario Raviglione, director of the WHO Stop TB Department, ""This is a game-changer for TB and MDR-TB [multidrug-resistant TB] care delivery. [We have seen] innovation happening in real time - scientific evidence rapidly translated into policy, policy quickly adapted into practice, and scale-up significantly accelerated by innovative funding mechanisms effectively addressing cost and affordability."" This is perhaps the most successful recent example of innovations in diagnostics in emergency disease responses. It reveals some interesting features of the innovation process, and by extension, the supporting innovation ecosystem. While this was an innovation that has been used in humanitarian contexts the humanitarian sector was not the main instigator of the innovation process. Some recognition of the problems and opportunities around TB testing did indeed take place in humanitarian settings, this was not sufficient to trigger a process of selection and invention. Instead, the development of the test happened in a separate innovation process, involving public health campaigns and advocacy, public-private partnerships and commercial entities. It was after only the successful trial of the test in ideal settings that it was brought into consideration by the humanitarian sector. In this case, as in the health field more generally, this was by means of trials, with a focus on the generation of evidence of effectiveness. Humanitarian operations were the focus of iterations between development and implementation. The scale-up and dissemination required a large-scale and concerted intervention on non-humanitarian actors, although this happened in part because of the advocacy of a range of actors including MSF. 21 Menzies NA, Cohen T, Lin H-H, Murray M, Salomon JA (2012) Population Health Impact and Cost-Effectiveness of Tuberculosis Diagnosis with Xpert MTB/RIF: A Dynamic Simulation and Economic Evaluation. PLoS Med 9(11): e1001347. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001347 22 WHO (2013) GeneXpert GuidePg. 23-25/43: Outbreak control: Great for Polio, What about Ebola? Outbreak control efforts ensure that new disease events are rapidly detected and managed through adequate preparedness (i.e. medical stockpiles, standard treatment protocols and staff training) and rapid responses (i.e. confirmation, investigation and implementation of control measures). Here the positive example is of the Syria polio response, and the use of an innovative new outbreak control mechanisms, in comparison to the relative weakness of the Ebola outbreak control effort. An important innovation in outbreak control has been deployed successfully in Syria in the past two years, in response to the re-emergence of polio after the conflict that has wracked the country since 2012. Polio eradication is the focus of a global campaign launched by the WHO in 1988, led by a partnership between a number of national governments, WHO, UNICEF, CDC and the NGO Rotary International. Since 1988, thanks to the efforts of the campaign, the incidence of polio has been reduced by more than 99%. From being endemic in more than 125 endemic countries, today only four countries remain that have never stopped endemic transmission of polio: Afghanistan, India, Nigeria and Pakistan43. For many of the successful countries, the eradication approach was based on vaccine-based treatments for children, with the vaccine used in 2 rounds over a period of 4-6 weeks. This time gap between rounds was necessary because the initial vaccine combined three different variations of polio virus (known as trivalent and the large gap between doses minimised the potential of negative interference between these three virus types while in the gut of vaccinated children. In 2005, a new single virus vaccine (known as monovalent) was found to be effective in many cases, without running the same risks of viral interference. Because of this new vaccine, the time between doses could be reduced to 1-2 weeks, and population immunity can be built up more rapidly. This is of particular importance when there are new outbreaks, in emergency settings where it is necessary to achieve a high level of immunity in a short time, or in situations where security and access means that the population is difficult to reach and immunization cannot take place in a predictable and regular fashion. T his new approach was called the short interval additional dose approach, or SIAD for short44. The programmatic benefits of SIADs were first established in its successful application in Somalia in 2006. Somalia had managed to eradicate polio in 2002, but it became re-infected in 2005 by polio originating in Nigeria. The campaign was severely constrained by ongoing and entrenched conflict across the country, which was regularly ranked as the most dangerous and insecure country in the world. Thanks to the work of a team of national volunteers and health workers who visited every household in every settlement multiple times, 1.8 million children under 5 were vaccinated. The WHO, in announcing the eradication of polio in Somalia, stated that it was enabled in large part because of the innovation of SIAD, which meant that infants in insecure areas could be 43 Global Polio Eradication Initiative (2015) Website: http://www.polioeradication.org/Polioandprevention.aspx 44 Global Polio Eradication Initiative (2010) The Short Interval Additional Dose (SIAD) - An intensified campaign approach to deliver monovalent Oral Polio Vaccine (mOPV) Implementation Guide 23immunized multiple times in a short time period45. The success in Somalia led to the SIAD approach being established as a core eradication strategy  in those countries still subject to Polio outbreaks. However, while the strategy was persuasive  from an operational perspective, the scientific basis was not well established. The Polio Research Committee approved a clinical trial in Egypt in 2010, and Pakistan in 2012, to assess  the efficacy of SIAD. These trials have shown that population immunity could be more rapidly  enhanced through SIAD46. The positive outcomes of these trials informed subsequent decisions to roll out SIAD in Syria,  where the ongoing conflict saw a polio outbreak in October 2013, the first in the country for  over 14 years. Eventually reaching dozens of cases, and spreading across the border to Iraq, the  outbreak was referred to by the UN as the most challenging outbreak in the history of polio  eradication. Access restrictions and a highly mobile population were compounded by the  challenges of high insecurity inside Syria and damaged health infrastructures. The initial UNICEF-__WHO strategy for responding to polio in Syria included SIAD as an innovative vaccine  delivery approach that should be applied in Syria and the surrounding countries. The strategy  highlighted the need for multiple doses in short time periods, the mobilization of community  resources (as in Somalia), effective communication messages about the SIAD approach to share  with communities, and negotiated access to hard-__to-__reach populations47. This was launched in December 2013 as the largest ever vaccination campaign in the Middle East, with plans to reach 25 million children across seven countries in the region, with more than 2 million inside Syria. At the time of finalizing this report, the WHO announced that there had been no new cases in Syria for a year, in large part because of the success of the SIAD strategy. The response also saw a unique event in August 2014, where a number of operational health  agencies convened a regional forum during the ongoing response to review innovative  strategies for limiting the transmission of polio. This was led by WHO, and brought together  officials across multiple agencies and countries, specifically to deal with the outbreak that had  been declared a public health emergency of international concern. A key theme of the meeting  deliberations was the use of existing innovations in mapping, surveillance, and control  measures, with a particular focus on new medical and communication technologies. The best counter-__example to the success of SIAD is to be found in the Ebola response. Good  outbreak control means an effective package of interventions, from case management  surveillance, treatments, and social mobilization. All of these were apparent in the Syria polio  effort. However, almost none of these were present in Ebola, meaning that Ebola outbreak  control was always going to be weaker than for polio. However, there were particular failures  inherent to the relative novelty of the disease and its emergence in urban settings for the first  time that highlighted the challenge of innovation in outbreak control. The key focus of outbreak control was on reducing human transmission, and focused on risk  reduction messaging for affected country populations. This focused on factors such as reducing  possible new infections from wildlife-__to-__human transmission, reduced human-__to-__human 45 WHO (2012) Somalia Polio Eradication Initiative Website http://www.emro.who.int/polio/countries/somalia.html 46 Global Polio Eradication Initiative (2010) Evaluating SIAD, The Polio Pipeline, Winter 2010, Issue 5 47 WHO-__UNICEF (2013) WHO/UNICEF Strategic plan for polio outbreak response 24transmission through hygiene and protective equipment, containment measures such as safe and prompt burials of the dead, contact tracing and containment of sick individuals in quarantine. There was also a set of challenges around controlling outbreaks in healthcare settings through adequate precautions, from hygiene to protective gear. In many cases, however, these strategies promoted by the international community have not been targeted in a strategic fashion.Pg. 16/43: The innovation ecosystem works better when it anticipates crises, and generated products and processes in advance, which can be tested and trialed for use in particular crises – as was the case with the TB test. Although the new PCR machine was a remarkably rapid example of innovation moving from search to scale, this was only triggered by humanitarian concern, and has not led to a product that can be used in humanitarian settings. This reveals the downside of system that worked so well for TB tests: it does not always work well for the most vulnerable people. The most significant diagnostic improvements that have followed the humanitarian crisis of Ebola has been for the benefits of citizens of developed countries, and not those in the crisis context who have the most urgent needs. For those suffering from or at risk of Ebola in the three most-affected West African countries, the innovation ecosystem simply delivered too little, too late. On a more positive note, however, it may well be that the diversity of Ebola tests now available will lead to trials and a successful product for use in future outbreaks.Pg. 16-17/43: Innovations in emergency disease prevention cover a spectrum of disciplines and approaches, with some being more cultural and social, and others being more technically focused. Often, the most effective preventative mechanisms are those that integrate a range of disciplines. One of the most significant innovations of recent years has been in malaria prevention. In post- disaster settings, especially those that involved geophysical events such as floods, cyclones and earthquakes, there may be rapid change or a sharp increase in potential breeding sites for mosquitoes. Affected populations may also adapt to disasters in ways that increase their proximity to existing sites, for example through evacuation processes. Children are especially vulnerable in these situations. In many settings, displaced communities are given insecticide- treated bed nets, but these distributions assume that families have decent shelter facilities, which is often far from the case. In some settings, disaster-affected populations have been known to use malaria nets as doorways or dividing walls in temporary shelters, rather than for their intended use. 16Thanks to improved surveillance techniques, it is possible to better predict new malaria outbreaks, especially in settings where malaria is related to seasonal events such as floods. In these contexts, one option for effective prevention is to give treatment-level doses of drugs at regular intervals during the transmission season regardless of whether children in question have malaria symptoms or not. This approach, now known as Seasonal Malaria Chemoprevention (SMC), had been applied in a number of post-disaster settings but there was little rigorous evidence about whether it worked or not. This was an interesting example of an approach being in use without decent validation, and therefore being limited in its possible dissemination26. This changed in 2012, when researchers linked with the international Cochrane Collaboration to further evidence-based medicine conducted a review of the available evidence on SMC27. They focused on seven high quality studies in the West African countries of Burkina Faso, Gambia, Senegal, two in The Gambia and two in Mali - all countries where malaria transmission is highly seasonal. Across the countries, children aged between 3 months to 6 years were given up to 3 days of anti-malarial treatments on a regular basis during the seasonal peak period. In all of thee countries, the preventative approach proved highly effective, preventing 75% of all malaria cases and 75% of severe cases, with minimal serious side effects. The review team showed that the results were also relevant for other areas with similar malarial conditions - specifically where a minimum of 60% of annual cases occur in 4 consecutive months. SMC was found to be especially useful to protect the health of children at risk from severe malaria where there is limited access to care, such as in refugee camps, evacuation centres and other post-disaster settings. In innovation terms SMC could be understood as having passed the search process, having been selected and developed, and implemented in some settings, but without much clarity of when and how it worked. The process of gathering and synthesising evidence helped to formalize the procedure through synthesis of test results from a variety of settings. Further implementation was greatly facilitated in late 2012, when the WHO made direct use of the Cochrane Systematic Review to draft a policy recommendation for SMC. The seven trials selected by the systematic review were cited in the recommendation papers. The WHO put the SMC recommendation as follows: “With the changing epidemiology of malaria, there is a progressive paradigm shift from a “one size fits all” approach, to the targeting of malaria control strategies to specific populations and/or locations for maximal effectiveness. In keeping with this approach, WHO is now recommending a new intervention against Plasmodium falciparum malaria: seasonal malaria chemoprevention (SMC). This intervention has been shown to be effective, cost-__effective, safe, and feasible for the prevention of malaria among children less than 5 years of age in areas with highly seasonal 26 WHO (2013) Seasonal Malaria Chemoprevention Website 27 Cairns, M (2012) Estimating the potential public health impact of seasonal malaria chemoprevention in African children, Nature Communications 3, Article number: 881Pg. 15/43: A number of different organisations, from the WHO, Wellcome Trust, USAID, US FDA and FIND (who were involved in the rapid TB test) have encouraged and incentivized the search and development of new rapid tests in the most-affected countries. Such incentives include provision of protocols and standards that new tests should meet. For example, the WHO and FIND have worked together established a target product profile for rapid simple tests that can be used in the control of Ebola, and have also generated an inventory of products currently available24. This product profile sets out everything from the diagnostic methods to specifying the conditions in which any new test must be deployable, and the skill requirements for implementing the tests. The collaboration has also developed guidance for the procurement of biochemical materials for use in the tests. This can be viewed as a vital strategic input into the search and development process. Some donors have also supported the development of new products. Wellcome Trust and DFID, through ELRHA, have funded the development of a new 15 minute test to be trialed in Guinea. USAID have funded an innovation window on Ebola, working with the design company IDEO, working on a range of issues from improved diagnostics to health-worker protection though cheap but effective suits. This rapid investment has led to the emergence and flowering of a diversity new ideas and technologies for diagnostics. For example, there are some tests that work without the need for refrigeration, while some focus on improving accuracy without the use of the PCR method. Others seek to provide a mobile ‘lab in a suitcase’, while others take account of safety requirements.Pg. 15/43: 24 WHO / FIND (2014) Target Product Profile for Zaïre ebolavirus rapid, simple test to be used in the control of the Ebola outbreak in West Africa http://www.who.int/medicines/publications/target-product-profile.pdfPg. 20/43: During a disaster, it is important to conduct surveillance to determine the extent and scope of the health effects on the affected populations. It allows humanitarian agencies to assess the human health impacts of a disaster and evaluate potential problems related to planning and prevention. One ongoing and tested innovation in this area is the collaboration between the World Health Organization and the Philippines Department of Health in 2010, to develop a mobile-technology based early warning disease surveillance systems for post-disaster situations36. This approach, called SPEED, has subsequently been deployed in every major emergency to hit that country. 35 Farmer P, Almazor CP, Bahnsen ET, Barry D, Bazile J, et al. (2011) Meeting Cholera’s Challenge to Haiti and the World: A Joint Statement on Cholera Prevention and Care. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 5(5): e1145. 36Surveillance in Post Extreme Emergencies and Disasters (SPEED) (2014) Website: http://www.wpro.who.int/philippines/areas/emergencies_disasters/speed/en/Pg. 25-27/43: Disease management: technology for incremental change, facing resistance to radical improvements Disease management involves the diagnosis and treatment of cases promptly with trained staff using effective treatment and standard protocols at all health facilities. As already noted, in 2013 in Haiti, the response to the cholera outbreak of 2010 led to a number of technological innovations in the response. One in particular which did lead to a positive contribution to the disease response was led by the NGO Partners in Health and a number of local organisations, in collaboration with medical researchers. It involved the deployment of a mobile technology based health system for management of treatments for 50,000 participants in two communities. The system was deployed as part of a reactive oral cholera vaccination (OCV) campaign during the ongoing epidemic50. The core of the mobile health innovation was a tablet computer based information management system combined with geospatial mapping technology. With software developed for use on 7- inch tablets that could be easily deployed to the field, the operational teams pre-registered participants and distributed vaccine cards with unique barcodes to treatment-eligible residents during a census in February 2012. First stored on the mobile devices, the data was uploaded nightly via Wi-fi to a web-hosted database. During the treatment campaign between April and June 2012, residents presented their cards at vaccination posts and their barcodes were scanned. Patient data from the census were pre-loaded on tablets to auto-populate the electronic form. Nightly analysis of the day's 48 MSF (2014) Ebola Response: Where Are We Now? MSF Briefing Paper 49 ibid 50 Teng, JE etal (2014) Using Mobile Health (mHealth) and geospatial mapping technology in a mass campaign for reactive oral cholera vaccination in rural Haiti. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Jul 31;8(7) 25community coverage informed the following day's treatment strategy, and generated case-finding reports allowing identification of those who not yet vaccinated. During 40 days of the programme, the team collected approximately 1.9 million pieces of data. A total of 45,417 people received at least one OCV dose; of those, 90.8% were documented to have received 2 doses51. Although the platform required up-front financial investment and training, it reduced the need for paper registries and manual data entry, which would have been costly, time-consuming, and was known to increase error. Using Global Positioning System coordinates, the team was able to map treatment posts, and link these to population size, and subsequently vaccine coverage to understand the reach of the campaign. A follow-on study showed that the use of mobile health technology in the OCV campaign allowed timely creation of an electronic registry with population-level census data, and a targeted treatment strategy in a dispersed population. It was concluded that the use of mobile health should be strongly considered in cholera treatment campaigns in future initiatives52. This particular innovation is noteworthy because it is a process innovation, which sought to enhance the effectiveness of an existing protocol. Such innovations can, it would appear, be effectively managed within the humanitarian innovation ecosystem. What the system does do well is incremental innovations, which are no major challenge to practices or assumptions. However, more radical approaches to treatment are not always easily accepted. There are historical examples of innovations in treatment being resisted by the sector, often on the basis of existing medical knowledge and practice. For example, in the 1980s, the rise of TB cases in refugee camps was seen as problematic, but existing knowledge suggested that TB treatments should not be contemplated in such inherently unstable situations As one researcher notes, “it took several bold individuals and several controlled trials to establish beyond doubt that TB could be treated in refugee settings, even in rather unstable conditions. These previously controversial practices are now accepted”. 53 Some three decades on, there is still some reticence for utilizing TB treatments in emergencies: treatment can take up to 6 months, and require meeting WHO criteria that is often impossible in post-disaster settings. The SPHERE project found that that poorly implemented TB programmes are widespread in humanitarian settings, and suggested that suboptimal programmes, which deliver fewer than 6 months of treatment, have the potential to do more harm than good54. A more recent example of the same phenomenon is the slow take up of the antiretroviral drugs in emergency settings. Up until relatively recently, populations affected by emergencies were seen as “neglected in the provision of essential HIV/AIDS prevention, treatment and care services, in particular, in the delivery of life-__saving antiretroviral drugs (ARVs) for prevention and 51 ibid 52 ibid 53 Coninx, R (2007) Tuberculosis in complex emergencies, Bulletin of the World Health Organization, Volume 85, Number 8, August 2007, 569-648 54 The Sphere Project (2004)Humanitarian charter and minimum standards in disaster response 26treatment of HIV infections”. 55 In particular, there were four key areas of challenges that needed to be overcome for facilitating delivery of ARVs in emergencies. The first set of issues was around communication, with regular channels typically disrupted by emergency events. For complex treatments such as ARVs, which involve elaborate appointments, prescriptions and medication schedules, and good communication between clinics and other facilities, the lack of effective communication channels is a major impediment. Access to care is also a major challenge, in settings where health facilities and pharmacies may be destroyed or impossible to access. The capacity of health systems, in terms of human resources and infrastructure, is also often diminished or limited by emergencies. This can lead to challenges in terms of being seen by health workers with sufficient knowledge of ARV treatments, and also more fundamental issues such as an inability to maintain complex patient records. Healthcare capacity is also under strain during emergencies, with more obvious and immediate health challenges taking priority for those managing overwhelming case loads. Fourth, there are issues around the disruption of supply chains of medications and other essential goods involved in patient care. This is especially challenging for medications like ARVs that require steady temperature control or refrigeration. Rational distribution of supplies is made problematic by unpredictable shifts in demand and limited communications. The shift started to happen around twelve years ago, with more organisations suggesting that there were means by which these challenges could be overcome. As with TB, the complex regimes associated with antiretroviral treatment was seen as impossible in emergency settings. Feasibility studies showed ARV delivery was possible and affordable in low-__income settings. T... (Remaining results omitted due to excel limitation. See online charts.)"	Build Resilience	Preventive Medicine	Damage & Need Assessment	Rapid Diagnostic	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics	Build Resilience	Risk Management	Communication	Mobile																																					HIE Case Study 3 - Shelter.pdf	"Pg. 14/44: TSA and T=shelters were deployed in Kashmir (2005), Yogyakarta (2005) and Pisco (2007), and in post=conflict return (Sri Lanka 2007) and post=election violence (Kenya 2008). The success of the approach was reflected in the Shelter Centre’s leading role in publishing a revision to the 1982 UNDRO ‘Shelter After Disaster’ guidelines, and informed several key shelter publications of that period including: • the World Bank’s ‘Safer Homes, Stronger Communities: A Handbook for Reconstructing after Natural Disasters’;24 • the Sphere Project’s ‘Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Disaster Response’;25 and • Shelter Centre and NRC’s ‘Urban Shelter Guidelines: Assistance in Urban Areas to Populations Affected by Humanitarian Crises’.26 In the same year that each of these documents were published however, the 2010 Haitian earthquake marked a second watershed in the thought and practice of humanitarian shelter. In particular, the event strongly challenged the applicability of the t=shelter as it had been hitherto understood for 21st century humanitarian crises. The scale of the disaster; the sheer numbers of intervening NGOs and charitable groups; the predominantly urban nature of the population, with 80% of inhabitants being renters; and the paralysis of government both before and after the disaster, gave lease to a series of publications suggesting that lessons from previous = largely rural – deployments of the T=shelter in particular were of limited utility and transportability and in some cases, even counter=productive.27 There are some good examples oft=shelter use in response to the Haitian earthquake, in particu= lar where land ownership was not in contention, but they are few relative to the scale of the need. In general, and as presented by the DEC, the resort to t=shelters by many agencies “as a viable urban option here have been subjected to a barrage of criticism from all sides”,28 with them reportedly labelled variously as ‘a total waste of money’, ‘counter=developmental’ and ‘suiting NGO timeframes and marketing needs’ rather than the needs of the disaster=affected. In articulating the concerns of many shelter stakeholders, the DEC evaluation of the response in Port=au=Prince reflected the particularly pressing concern of the World Bank; that urban risk represents a ‘game changer’ for humanitarian shelter. “[If this is right, and urban risk presents something different, then agencies need to learn ‘new rules of the game’ in urban post disaster response. Issues of complexity, range of actors, space, the importance of commerce and trade, services, infrastruc- ture and sheer concentrations of people require a consideration of how to operate compared to rural contexts, including collaborations (with government and the private sector), the importance of cash based programmes..., markets...and housing (considering trade-offs between short term shelter and long term settlements and thinking about forms of rental).”29 24 World Bank (2010). 25 Sphere Project (2011). 26 Crawford (2010). 27 For example, formal or informal camps established immediately following a disaster may in fact become extensions to (or ghettos of) the city with limited access to services and meagre employment opportunities. 28 Clermont et al. (2011), p.2. 29 Ibid.Pg. 12/44: Moving forward: developments in policy and practice While the foregoing discussion suggests that attempts to operationalise the sector’s conceptual basis have generally proven problematic for innovation development,15 there has been some notable progress, and particularly so in the period embraced by this case study. The Transitional Shelter Approach and the T=shelter Perhaps the first paradigmatic shift in what many experts would agree to be the “right direction” occurred when the Shelter Project, an independent university=affiliated not=for=profit organisation established at the University of Cambridge in 2001, introduced the transitional settlement approach (TSA). A USAID=InterAction workshop report referred to the approach’s transformative influence: “The shelter and settlements sector is currently undergoing a period ofgrowth and expansion both in terms of the conceptual framework that guides it and the funding and resources that fuel it. A working definition of shelter is increasingly recognized as wedded to a broader notion of transition. The current spotlight on transitional shelter represents a movement along a continuum away from traditional shelter and towards a transitional settlement approach.6 The TSA proposed to support those displaced by disaster “from emergency response to durable solutions” in a way that “considers the wider impacts of settlement...emphasising the need for a transition to durable settlement solutions and local development”.17 TSA also intended to address the fact that post=disaster sheltering is often undertaken by affected populations themselves, and that this self=management should be supported. TSA therefore sought to go beyond the approach that had previously dominated humanitarian shelter programming, “with its limited focus on the provision of planned camps” and instead looked to provide enhanced support for “all the shelter and settlement options that are open to displaced people” in post=disaster settings.18 After consultations with stakeholders at biennial fora hosted by the Shelter Project, these transitional options were categorised as follows: 15 OCHA notes that since the 1980s, “innovations in postdisaster shelter and housing have been limited”. Exploring key changes and developments in post=disaster settlement, shelter and housing, 1982 – 2006, UNOCHA, 2006. 16 InterAction & USAID (2006), p.3. 17 Shelter Project (2005), p.3 18 Ibid, p.7.Pg. 13/44: Where the above six options might be regarded as unsuitable during recovery and the progress towards a durable solution, the TSA proposed a seventh typology in support of the transition of both displaced and non=displaced populations, the transitional shelter (t=shelter).20 T=shelters are designed to circumvent land tenure constraints21 and make use of shelter materi= als distributed in the emergency phase, as well as local building materials, to incrementally de= velop a durable solution. T=shelter structures may be “reused in part or in whole in more perma- nent structures, or relocated from temporary to permanent locations and can promote the transi- tion by affected populations to more durable shelter”.22 As a manifestation of the TSA, T=shelters were envisaged for use as part of a comprehensive inter=sector shelter strategy that could sup= port the transition of affected populations to durable solutions. The TSA and the T=shelter approach were first deployed in response to the Indian Ocean Tsu= nami of 2004 following the secondment of Shelter Centre (previously Shelter Project) staff through DFID to UNHCR in Sri Lanka, and UN OCHA in Indonesia. Because almost all the agen= cies and shelter specialists participating in the coordination of the Tsunami response also par= ticipated in the biennial ‘Shelter Meeting’ forum for shelter and reconstruction, consensus around general approaches to shelter needs following the Tsunami was formed very quickly on the basis of pre=established common understandings around good technical practice, terminol= ogy and coordination. The TSA/T=shelter approach fitted well with the Build Back Better maxim adopted for the Tsu= nami response, in so far as they proposed meaningful consideration of both the transformative implications of technical assistance, and the long=term consequences of emergency humanitari= an relief. Some 60,000 t=shelters were built in 6 months in Sri Lanka, and tested later in Aceh before the publication of the TSA guidelines in 2005, detailing lessons learned from the experi= ence.23 19 Figure from Ibid, p.9. 20 T=shelter is explored in more detail as a case study in this report, p22. 21 Although experience in some urban environments has tended to confound this objective. 22 Sphere Project (2011), p.252. 23 In Haiti 2010 however, this was arguably to the detriment of the t=shelter as a technical response. See for instance, Fan (2013).Pg. 23-24/44: Zone 1 – Exploit Concrete Canvas Shelter The Concrete Canvas Shelter (CCS) is a rapidly deployable shelter that comprises two elements: a concrete cloth outer surface bonded to an inflatable plastic inner. Designed to provide instant infrastructure with a minimum of labour, equipment and materials, construction of a 270sqft CCS takes less than an hour using only water and air, requires no specialist training and is ready for use in 24 hours. The CCS attracted attention in 2006 when it was awarded the Saatchi & Saatchi World Changing Ideas Award, being described as a product which “answers a need that has been thrown into particularly sharp focus this year with the impact of the tsunami and the Pakistan earthquake”. Similarly celebrated was the product’s potential to substantially outlast conventional plastic tenting in harsh climactic conditions. As recently as 2013, a Concrete Canvas Company Director described the CCS as still in “significant demand from the aid sector”. In spite of these claims, a material that started life as a rapidly deployable humanitarian shelter has evolved to become a mainstream private sector civil engineering solution with only limited application for humanitarians as field hospitals and command and control centres. Indeed, feedback as to their use as a post=disaster shelter has been almost unanimously critical, with a standard unit weighing 1 tonne (raising issues of transportability over even short distances), 23Radical Incremerntal Established frame Environmental compleirity New framedemanding 1 tonne of water, a scarce commodity in most immediate crises, to activate it, a supply of electricity to inflate it, and costing $15,000 to purchase. The innovation also presents political issues. Although many refugee camps are acknowledged to exist for many years, humanitarian agencies and governments are unwilling to admit this with the installation of semi=permanent buildings. The semi=permanency of the CCS also arguably fails to promote the return of those affected by disaster to their previous or alternative dwellings, and therefore undermines a core premise of humanitarian shelter: that it should support those affected by crisis to return home or to make better homes in a new location. These problems are in addition to the very obvious difficulties presented by the product in terms of land and property rights, and habitability. Cataloguing IFRC Shelter Kits The IFRC Shelter Kit is a collection of tools and fixings combined with two plastic tarpaulin sheets. Like shelter kits provided by other agencies, it is intended to complement the repair of structures as a result of a humanitarian emergency and, although it does not include materials for the frame of a structure, it can complement local materials in the production of various forms of emergency temporary shelter. It can similarly be combined with available materials to build structures such as latrines, fences and rainwater harvesting systems. The inclusion of common tools further enables its use for other critical shelter tasks such as removing rubble, digging drainage ditches and preparing ground and supporting basic livelihood activities such as farming and boat building. Shelter kits are by no means a new product innovation. The distribution of construction materials and tools has been a common element in emergency shelter relief for many years. However given such packages had only been developed post=disaster prior to the introduction of the IFRC kit, inconsistencies in specification and quality were commonplace and delays in provision were often experienced. By creating a standardised shelter kit, pre=positioned regionally in significant quantities using defined and tested specifications, IFRC sought to attend to these common problems. Indeed, IFRC has significantly improved the speed of delivery and predictability at the start of shelter responses. In 2008, a total of 50,000 IFRC shelter kits were distributed in Myanmar, Haiti, Nepal and Cuba, to rapidly provide the preferred “non=tent” shelter relief. The success of the model has since been replicated by DFID and other agencies suggesting the concept has been an incremental procedural improvement to an existing and widely used product."	Shelter	Rapid Shelters	Shelter	CCS																																											Humanitarian-Innovation-Ecosystem-research-litrev.pdf	"Pg. 35/51: 4.5.2: Technology viewed as prime enabler. There is an equal amount of excitement and cynicism about the role of technology (ALNAP, 2009; UNOCHA, 2013): as an innovation in its own right, and as a supporting factor in innovation management processes. Some prominent international organisations with an interest in humanitarian innovation have not moved very far beyond the deployment of mobile technologies in responses. The challenge here is that this may lead to simply bringing mobile technologies into existing processes, rather than seeking to significantly change these processes. Separately, there has been a lot of interest in big data approaches, on the role of UAVs, 3D printing, and other cutting-edge technologies (UNOCHA, 2013). These vary considerably in terms of their potential for deployment in operations."	Communication	Mobile	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics																																											Humanitarianism in the Cyberwarfare Age - OCHA Policy Paper 11.pdf	"Pg. 8/22: New Ways to Collect Humanitarian Data SMS and cell phones: SMS surveys and hotlines can collect data even from remote areas. Mobile devices: Smart phones and tablets can be used to collect and rapidly collate field survey results, adding GPS coordinates, photos and other data. Social media: Social media can provide snapshots of situations for needs assessments or for sharing information with communities. Cell-phone data: Cell-phone data can be used to track movement and displacement, monitor spending patterns and many other uses. Big data and private sector data: Other large data sets from private companies and governments have potential humanitarian uses. Crowdsourcing and Digital Humanitarians: Humanitarians are using volunteer and technical communities or the public to produce and analyse data. UAVs and satellites: Unmanned aerial vehicles and a new generation of satellites will provide detailed images and data, even in remote areas. Biometrics: Biometric scans can produce unique identifiers for individuals even when there is no formal ID.Pg. 9/22: Case Study 1 – Biometric registration in humanitarian projects Biometrics, such as fingerprints and iris scans, allow unique identification of individuals, even when they lack documents. Increasingly common in humanitarian response, particularly in camp situations, biometrics provide a powerful tool for financial accountability, helping ensure that benefits go to the correct people. At the same time, the technology raises concerns about privacy, inappropriate use and accuracy. A number of countries have debated and rejected the use of biometrics, particularly when stored in centralized databases, for their own citizens.5 After the Kakuma refugee camp in Kenya introduced a mandatory biometric food registration system in 2013, refugees expressed concerns about the expo- sure of their identity to multiple aid agencies and the government, all of whom have access to a centralized database.6 There are also concerns about “scope creep”, as a biometric database developed for aid distributions could be linked with others or appropri- ated for security or political purposes. For example, when UNHCR was discussing sharing biometric information, including iris scans, with the Lebanese Government, refugees expressed concern about the security of the data with one worrying, “They’ll take that information and give it to the Syrian government.”7 The databases can also be a tempting target for cyber-groups or criminals. When any verification system is linked directly to aid delivery, there is also the practical question of how reliable the technology is. In the past, biometrics scans have had a substantial error rate, and may create biases against certain classes of people: iris scans may not work with the blind or people with cataracts, while fingerprints can be difficult to capture from those who do a lot of manual labour, particularly women.8 In Sep- tember 2013 in the Mbera camp in Mauritania, for example, 6500 refugees were denied aid because of problems with the biometric registration system.9 While the efficiency of these systems continues to improve, it is important to consider other types of supplementary verification and have an efficient appeals process. Biometrics systems, like other new informa- tion technologies, promise efficiency gains for donors and aid organiza- tions, but must be balanced against privacy and technical concerns, and the feelings of affected people.Pg. 9/22: 5 Gus Hosein and Carly Nyst, Aiding Surveillance: An Exploration of How Development and Humanitarian Aid Initiatives are Enabling Surveillance in Developing Countries, September 2013, Available from http://ssrn.com/abstract=2326229 or http://dx.doi. org/10.2139/ssrn.2326229. 6 “Classified Fingerprinting,” Kakuma News Reflector, A Refugee Free Press, 11 August 2014. Available from http://kanere.org/2013/11/30/classified-fingerprinting/ 7 Elise Knutsen and Samya Kullab, “Power to Strip Refugee Status Agreed,” Daily Star, 2 June 2014. Available from http://www.unhcr.org/cgi-bin/texis/vtx/ refdaily?pass=463ef21123&id=538d5b5f8. 8 Katja Lindskov Jacobsen, “Making design safe for citizens: A hidden history of humanitarian experimentation”, Citizenship Studies, 2010, 14:1, 89-103. 9 Gus Hosein and Carly Nyst, “Aiding Surveillance”."	Damage & Need Assessment	Crowdsourcing	Damage & Need Assessment	Imagery (UAV/Satellite)	Identity Management	Biometric Scanners	Privacy 	Information Seciruty																																							Innovation in Humanitarian Action-Hugo Slim.pdf	"Pg. 7/16: Protecting people in these situations requires innovative hybrid forms of practice and position, which mix humanitarian and paramedic practice with deeper development and human rights work. The Canadian Government’s development research fund, International Development Research Centre (IDRC) is currently funding research into endemic violence reduction, and finding that prevention can be enhanced by digital technology already in the hands of vulnerable communities.17Pg. 11/16: A dream innovation for humanitarian workers would be some form of “neutrino aid” which, like electronically neutral neutrinos, slips through the material world of conflict, checkpoints and corruption to arrive directly in the hands of people that need it. Humanitarians are getting there. Mobile telephony has allowed humanitarians to transfer money to desperate people in virtual space beyond the grip of armed men and their checkpoints. In Somalia in 2011, UNICEF led a path- breaking programme that transferred $95 million to many thousands of people when food aid was banned from Al Shabaab controlled areas. The money came too late to stop 257,000 people from starving to death between March and June, but it showed what is possible.30 Various experiments in low profile “remote management” aid have also been tried."	Online Cash	Mobile																																													ipi_pub_rethinking_humanitarianism.pdf	"Pg. 23/32: The ability of humanitarian actors to face the challenge presented by an increasing caseload and the changing nature of crises will also depend on their capacity to innovate and better harness new technologies, in particular ICTs. The development and spread of ICTs, in particular mobile phone technologies, opens new opportunities to quickly raise funds directly from the population of wealthier nations,72 to interact with and engage communities living in the most remote and insecure areas,73 and to deliver assistance or protec- tion in ways not thought about before.74 Similarly, the continued improvement of weather-forecasting technologies, climate science, and satellite imagery will contribute to improving early-warning systems, so that actors can better anticipate and prepare for future hazards.Pg. 23/32: 72 For instance, less than a week after the Haiti earthquake in 2010, the American Red Cross had raised $22 million via text messages. See Stephanie Strom, “Boon for Red Cross via Texting,” New York Times, January 19, 2010, p. 1. 73 The Danish Refugee Council is developing a project using Internet-based social networks and text messages on mobile phones to enable beneficiary participation in its assistance program in Somalia, increasing downward accountability and limiting risks of diversion of assistance by armed groups. See Danish Refugee Council, “Piloting Accountability Systems for Humanitarian Aid in Somalia,” concept paper submitted to the Humanitarian Innovation Fund, 2011, available at www.humanitarianinnovation.org/projects/drc-somalia . 74 Different projects using mobile phone technology to deliver cash through “electronic vouchers” have been developed in Kenya, Somalia, and Syria. See Paul Harvey et al., “Food Aid and Food Assistance in Emergency and Transitional Contexts: A Review of Current Thinking,” London: Overseas Development Institute, June 2010, p. 37."	Online Cash	Mobile	Communication	Mobile	Early Warning	Risk Management																																									IRC Humanitarian Technology A Critical Research Agenda.pdf	"Pg. 6/24: Cell phone usage enables remote communication, data transfers and establishment of management procedures, and has the potential to be hugely helpful with respect to preparedness, response and recovery. Examples include mitigation of the harmful effects of a crisis by way of providing early warning through text messaging, or real-time evaluations through SMS feedback from affected people receiving aid. As the trend towards digitalization of money has reached crisis and disaster zones, material relief is now increasingly distributed through e-transfers or by SMS. The data that populations generate through their everyday actions can be correlated to other information through crowdsourcing, identifying patterns of resource flows, movement and consumption. Crowdsourcing is a blanket term covering an array of ways in which many people contribute small amounts of data to form an aggregated larger dataset, usually via electronic means. In an aggregated form, such data can provide important insights into humanitarian needs and the effectiveness of interventions. Many types of data can be collected and aggregated to give a real-time understanding of developments in a particular area. Tracking the use of hate speech on social media can highlight areas of increased tension and potential violence. A sudden growth in remittances to particular countries or geographical locations can be a sign of greater vulnerability. Cell phone data can be used to track population movements in case of violent clashes or natural disasters.13 SMS surveys can be conducted in cooperation with cell phone companies to generate input on food insecurity or fear of violence. During disastrous events, data about the situation of disaster victims from various information sources, such as texts, e-mails, blog posts and tweets, can be processed by crisis mappers in order to create layered maps with geo- referenced information, thus allowing for the detection of focal points that are not easily identified through other technologies.14 A critical research agenda in this field raises the question of the academic tools and concepts we use to think about humanitarian technology. As noted by Duffield, there is a need to contemplate how technology and humanitarian policies on the ground change together, meaning that work in disciplines such as anthropology, sociology and geography, as well as history and cultural studies, will be important – in tandem with a thorough theorization.15 We suggest that while there has until now been little critical investigation into the use of new technology in humanitarian assistance, humanitarian studies being in itself a field in the making, a research agenda for the study of humanitarian technologies can learn a lot from science and technology studies (STS). With its critical view on technologies and their social functionalities, STS has significantly contributed to the understanding of what new technologies do to both social and power relationships.16 Today, throughout the humanitarian field, technology enables specific sets of political and military rationales and projects that must be examined not for their oft-alleged “newness”, but for the power they represent.17 The question is: where is power found, what does it look like, and how does it operate? In our view, there has never been any humanitarianism without technology.18 Furthermore, technology is not “bad” – but neither is it neutral, or just passively adopted by society. Technology is not an empty vessel waiting to be imbued with “humanitarian meaning”; rather, society and technology engage in a mutually constitutive relationship.19 The construction of technology is subject to political contestation, and to the realities of professionalism and finance.20 Med, No. 8, Vol. 8, 2011; UN Global Pulse, Characterizing Human Behavior During Floods Through the Lens of Mobile Phone Activity, 2014, available at: www.unglobalpulse.org/tabasco-floods-CDRs. 14 Anne Nelson and Ivan Sigal with Dean Zambrano, “Media, Information Systems and Communities: Lessons From Haiti”, (published 21 January 2011), available at: www.knightfoundation.org/media/ uploads/publication_pdfs/KF_Haiti_Report_English.pdf. 15 Mark Duffield, personal communication; Critical Humanitarian Technology Seminar, PRIO, 28 November 2014. 16 Wiebe E. Bijker and John Law, Shaping Technology/Building Society: Studies in Socio-Technical Change, MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 1992; Donald MacKenzie and Judy Wajcman, The Social Shaping of Technology, Open University Press, Milton Keynes, 1999; Geoffrey L. Herrera, “Technology and International Systems”, Millennium: Journal of International Studies, Vol. 32, No. 3, 2003, pp. 559–593; Stefan Fritsch, “Technology and Global Affairs”, International Studies Perspectives, Vol. 12, No. 1, 2011, pp. 27–45; Daniel R. McCarthy, “Technology and ‘the International’ or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Determinism”, Millennium: Journal of International Studies, Vol. 41, No. 3, 2013, pp. 470–490. 17 D. R. McCarthy, above note 16, pp. 471 and 489. 18 Scholars have long been interested in the use of technology for humanitarian purposes: see Robin Stephenson and Peter S. Anderson, “Disasters and the Information Technology Revolution”, Disasters, Vol. 21, No. 4, 1997, pp. 305–334. 19 D. MacKenzie and J.Wajcman, above note 16. 20 G. L. Herrera, above note 16, p. 560; see also W. E. Bijker and J. Law, above note 16.Pg. 6/24: 13 Linus Bengtsson et al. “Improved Response to Disasters and Outbreaks by Tracking Population Movements with Mobile Phone Network Data: A Post-Earthquake Geospatial Study in Haiti”, PLoSPg. 10/24: 31 Dorothea Hilhorst and Bram J. Jansen, “Humanitarian Space as Arena: A Perspective on the Everyday Politics of Aid”, Development and Change, Vol. 41, No. 6, 2010, pp. 1117–1139. 32 Antonio Donini (ed.), The Golden Fleece: Manipulation and Independence in Humanitarian Action, Kumarian Press, Sterling VA, 2012. 33 Kristin Bergtora Sandvik, “The Risks of Technological Innovation”, in IFRC, above note 29.Pg. 10/24: For example, technology can simultaneously be a medium of violence and of humanitarian action: historically, the radio has been the most important humanitarian information technology, but at the same time, violent actors have leveraged communication technologies to incite violence, promote conflict and perpetrate crimes. The classic example is the 1994 Rwandan genocide, where the broadcasts of Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines played a significant role in inciting mass killings. Moreover, in view of the nature of an emergency setting, any failure to consider the possible secondary effects of applying a specific new technology can lead to fatal outcomes. With the rise of digital humanitarianism, areas with limited or non-existent access to connectivity and digital technologies – risk becoming an invisible part of the humanitarian space.34 As noted by Patrick Vinck, “the on-the-ground reality is more often than not one of information poverty, limited mobile coverage and little or no access to internet for both humanitarians and communities at risk.”35 While one in four people on earth have started using some form of social media regularly, access is deeply unequal across the global emergency zone.36 Whereas the digital humanitarian response to Typhoon Yolanda in the Philippines played a significant role – 71% of the population has a cell phone and 34% a smartphone – the percentage of the population online in 2014 is 12% in Uganda and 8% in Pakistan.37 In addition to that, there are also geographically gendered differences that create localized digital divides: the technology gap between men and women is much larger in low-income countries than in high-income countries.38 While humanitarian actors often emphasize the democratizing potential of information technology in disasters and OCHA proposes that technology redistributes power,39 the emphasis on big data comes with its own particular blind spots regarding populations that are overlooked by big data.40 Will individuals and communities whose life patterns do not generate enough digital breadcrumbs to make it into the algorithms fall outside the humanitarian space? These are some of the challenges which are important to take into account when assessing the use of technology in the humanitarian setting.Pg. 10/24: 34 For an interesting case of a humanitarian organization addressing its own internal digital divide, see the IFRC’s digital divide initiative, “Technology in the Service of the Most Vulnerable”, 6 July 2011, available at: www.ifrcmedia.org/blog/technology-in-the-service-of-the-most-vulnerable/. 35 P. Vinck, above note 21, p. 30. 36 eMarketer, “Social Networking Reaches Nearly One in Four Around the World”, 18 June 2013, available at: www.emarketer.com/Article/Social-Networking-Reaches-Nearly-One-Four-Around-World/1009976. 37 Pew Research Center, Emerging Nations Embrace Internet, Mobile Technology, 13 February 2014, available at: www.pewglobal.org/2014/02/13/emerging-nations-embrace-internet-mobile-technology/; Neil Dufty, “A Review of the Value of Social Media in Countrywide Disaster Risk Reduction Public Awareness Strategies”, paper developed for the HFA Thematic Review and as an input to the Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 (GAR15), available at: http://works.bepress.com/neil_dufty/34.Pg. 11/24: 38 International Telecommunication Union, ICT Facts and Figures: The World in 2013, February 2013, available at: www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2013-e.pdf; Alison Gillwald, Anne Milek and Christoph Stork, “Gender Assessment of ICT Access and Usage in Africa”, Towards Evidence-Based ICT Policy and Regulation, Vol. 1, Policy Paper 2, 2009; Laura L. Murphy and Alexandra E. Priebe, “‘My Co-Wife Can Borrow My Mobile Phone!’ Gendered Geographies of Cell Phone Usage and Significance for Rural Kenyans”, Gender, Technology and Development, Vol. 15, No. 1, 2011, pp. 1–23. 39 OCHA, Humanitarianism in the Network Age (HINA) 2011. 40 Jonas Lerman, “Big Data and its Exclusions”, Stanford Law Review Online, 3 September 2013, available at: www.stanfordlawreview.org/online/privacy-and-big-data/big-data-and-its-exclusions.Pg. 14/24: Paving the way to new methods for distributing aid The notion that “[c]ommunications are an important form of aid, and can be of equal importance to survivors as food, water and shelter”,54 is a mainstay of the humanitarian technology discourse – and increasingly also of the general humanitarian discourse. According to the World Disasters Report 2013, “[s]elf-organization in a digital world affords opportunities unfeasible in the analogue past. Disaster-affected populations now have greater access to information, and many of their information needs during a crisis can be met by mobile technologies.”55 In essence, these kinds of statements represent a move to see value-added information as relief in itself.56 We suggest that attention must be paid not only to how humanitarian technology impacts on what counts as resources, but also to the distribution of resources, in terms of who gets what, who gets to distribute, where this happens and why. In the following section we consider the latter issue in greater depth by looking at the case of e-transfers, often called “mobile money” or “digital food” in the humanitarian context.Pg. 14/24: 53 Interview with OCHA official, New York, 11 October 2013. 54 GSMA, “Key Takeaways from the UN Working Group on Emergency Telecommunications”, 17 April 2014, available at: www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/key-takeaways-from-the-un-working-group- on-emergency-telecommunications. 55 See IFRC, above note 29, Chapter 3, p. 73. 56 This section builds on K. B. Sandvik, above note 26.Pg. 15/24: Nevertheless, challenges abound for the project, including “an unprepared agent network outside of Port-au-Prince, a lack of mobile network in northern Uganda, limited bank networks and payment infrastructure in remote areas of the Philippines and challenges channelling the cash for the transfers in Kenya.”62 In an early phase, WFP Kenya found that network connectivity was not strong enough to process payments under the initially devised solution. Unstable network coverage also presented a challenge: in July 2013, for example, Equity Bank experienced a week of unreliable service due to a crash of the operating system of its data base.63 Through the early implementation phase, there were inconsistent and delayed payments (initially, 74% of the recipients did not receive their payments), resulting in frustrated and confused recipients who sometimes took on short-term credit to cover the shortage. WFP expressed surprise over subsequent “recipient behaviour”: when cash did come, the vast majority rushed to the agent to cash out at the same time, because of lack of trust and because the programme only covered the cost of one withdrawal fee per payment cycle. This caused long lines, insufficient agent liquidity, agent frustration and recipient confusion. Recipients also lacked technical and financial literacy, and did not always know their PINs or how to enter them.64 Sometimes agents demanded recipients’ PINs or pressured recipients to buy goods in their outlets. Finally, many recipients had to travel significant distances to the nearest agents, and security continued to be an issue.65 Examples of this kind only point to selected challenges related to the use of technology for the distribution of resources.Pg. 15/24: 62 Jamie Zimmerman and Kristy Bohling, “E-Payments in Low-Income Settings: Cutting-Edge or High Risk?”, CGAP, 12 March 2014, available at: www.cgap.org/blog/e-payments-low-income-settings- cutting-edge-or-high-risk. 63 CGAP, above note 61. 64 L. Campbell, above note 49. 65 CGAP, above note 61.Pg. 7/24: 14 Anne Nelson and Ivan Sigal with Dean Zambrano, “Media, Information Systems and Communities: Lessons From Haiti”, (published 21 January 2011), available at: www.knightfoundation.org/media/ uploads/publication_pdfs/KF_Haiti_Report_English.pdf.Pg. 2/24: The humanitarian enterprise is characterized by considerable optimism regarding the possibility of improving humanitarian action through new, digital technology.1 The uses of mobile phones, social media platforms, geospatial technologies and various forms of crowdsourcing have fundamentally altered how humanitarian crises are detected and addressed, and how information is collected, analysed, and disseminated. Biometric identification technologies are increasingly used as tools for emergency support and refugee management. Relief provision is beginning to shift towards virtual distributions through digital payment systems, so-called e-transfers or “mobile money.” There are significant expectations surrounding the humanitarian uses of drones. As broadly acknowledged by policymakers and a burgeoning field of scholarly contributions, these developments are changing the possibilities for prevention, response and resource mobilization for humanitarian actors and affected communities alike.Pg. 2/24: 1 Acknowledging that the notion of technology is very broad and that humanitarian action has always been facilitated by some kind of technology – even as basic as pen and paper – we focus in this article on the influence of novel, mostly digital and web-based information and communication technologies on the humanitarian enterprise. 2 http://journals.cambridge.org Downloaded: 08 Dec 2014 IP address: 158.36.137.20"	Communication	Mobile	Early Warning	Mobile	Online Cash	Mobile	Damage & Need Assessment	Crowdsourcing	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics	Communication	ICT Infrastructure	Communication	Social Media																																	OCHA.Humanitarian Innovation.November 2014.pdf	"Pg. 7/30: Technology Development The innovation trend builds upon earlier and parallel de- bates on the potential for technology to strengthen emer- gency response. In just one example of the transformative potential of technology, cellular phones have provided a new platform for needs assessment and feedback mecha- nisms for affected people. While only 4 per cent of house- holds in Sub-Saharan Africa have Internet connections, for example, cell phone penetration is at 75 per cent in Africa as of 2012, and is expected to reach 97 per cent by 2017.iv New technology-based tools and volunteer and technical com- munities, such as Crisis Mappers, are available to respond to emergencies like the 2010 Haitian earthquake and 2013 Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines, further stimulating this debate. Prominent examples of humanitarian technology in- clude GPS-enabled mapping systems for response coordina- tion, social media analysis to conduct damage assessments, use of dedicated hashtags on Twitter to coordinate rescues and relief, and mobile phone-enabled funds transfers in the aftermath of crises.Pg. 24/30: Annex 1: Examples of Humanitarian Innovation1) Ceramic Water Filters A huge variety of low-tech products, also known as appro- priate or intermediate technologies, are produced by local inventors and tradesmen using available materials. However, few are scaled and used world-wide due to the challenge of designing low-tech products to be replicable and up to a standard, while remaining appropriate to the local context and materials. The ceramic water filter, made from local clays in small-scale factories, is an exception. Although not originally designed for humanitarian response, the product has made its way into humanitarian supply chains. Background Although ceramic filters were invented in the late 1800’s, Dr. Fernando Mazariegos developed the ceramic pot model in Guatemala in 1981. In the 1990’s Ron Rivera of Potters for Peace, a non-profit organization working with subsistence potters in Central America, adapted the design and stan- dardized the manufacturing and training processes used to disseminate the filter. The filter uses the skills of craftsmen and potters and locally available materials, and offers an affordable and familiar product for household use. Potters for Peace helps partners to help establish small factories or workshops. The organization sends volunteers to train local potters and help set up the manufacturing equipment and process to ensure quality. Follow-up visits support over 50 small factories and workshops worldwide. The devices work by filtering water through small cracks and through air holes created when sawdust or cornhusks mixed into the clay are burnt away during firing. Additional bacteria are killed off by a colloidal silver layer coating the inside and outside of the filter. The filter meets WHO standards and is thought to remove 99.88% of water borne disease agents. Reflections on the process The proliferation of workshops to produce ceramic filters has been enabled not just by individual champions, but also by external factors. Good relationships between potters and the organization Potters for Peace were already in place before the ceramic water filter project took off. The clay material and local crafts skills required to make the ceramic filters are also found in rural areas around the globe, making training relatively straightforward. The relatively low investment needed makes the manufacturing process accessible and replicable. Potters for Peace gained financial independence from these activities, helping the organiza- tion maintain long-term relationships with the independent factories in the form of training and support. The filters are easy to use in the home since people are already accustomed to storing water in similar receptacles. Point-of-use water filtration endorsement by the UN and WHO then helped scale devices such as the ceramic water filter. University interest, as well as support from internation- al organizations, also helped to spread local manufacture and development. Finally, the workshops and small factories are established to meet the demand of local partners who approached Potters for Peace, so there was little need to build buy-in from stakeholders. The filters have already spread to larger local manufacturers for purchase during emergency responses by NGOs, as in Myanmar for the response to Cyclone Nargis in 2008. Local suppliers are often sought after in humanitarian procure- ment, especially in the case of Myanmar due to strict and expensive import regulations. In Myanmar there are current- ly four suppliers mapped on the Potters for Peace site.i The model could be tried with other low-tech products, helping to ensure that quality standards of a locally pro- duced product are met. In fact, there are new ideas and products created each day, but an effective delivery model for getting them into markets seems to be the key deter- minant for scale and sustainable use in low-income and humanitarian contexts. 2) The Lifesaver Cube Originally inspired by the aftermath of the 2004 tsunami, Lifesaver Systems water filtration products reach the mili- tary, camping and humanitarian markets alike. One of the newest products is the Lifesaver Cube, which carries 5L of water and uses an inbuilt hand pump and filter to provide clean drinking water for household use. Background The Lifesaver Cube filters 5000L over its lifespan, enough to provide the WHO daily clean water requirement of up to 3.7L per person for a family of five for nine months. Despite mis- leading claims selling the product as “the new solution in the fight against water poverty”, like many point-of-use filters, the Lifesaver Cube is a relatively short-term solution for the first phase of an emergency. What makes this product stand out is its performance in filter technology, as the product filters out bacteria and viruses to a smaller size (15 nanome- tres) than other point-of-use filters. Tests from the Tropical School of Hygiene and Medicine support the performance of the Lifesaver Cube against viruses and bacteria, although, like most other filters, not salt and heavy metals. Reflections on the process DFID and Oxfam were consulted in the development of the product, and their feedback was taken into consideration for the design. Lifesaver Systems has been pre-approved to supply to emergency responses as part of DFID’s rapid response network.ii This buy-in from humanitarian actors may help the scale of the product, and has certainly helped in creating a robust filter for harsh conditions. However, it may face the same challenges for long-term use as most distributed items: maintenance after the emergency phase. In an effort to quickly scale point-of-use water filters, as UNICEFiii and WHOiv call for, companies often oversimplify the problem, lacking a full understanding of the context. The Lifesaver Cube has not faced the same critique as the Lifestraw, which has been criticized for not solving the real problem of water access and transport. However, although its storage capacity addresses this problem, even the Lifesaver Cube requires nearby water sources during an emergency response. The inventor of the Lifesaver Cube has stated, “[W]here do people live? Near water. All we have to do is make that water clean.”v Unfortunately, the solution is often more complex.Pg. 27/30: 4) Digital Humanitarian Network Academics, small start-ups, and a large public volunteer base with coding, mapping or other skills are developing internet and communication-based technologies (ICT) specifically for humanitarian work. Supporting development of ICT in emergencies, the Digital Humanitarian Network (DHN)vii is a volunteer network of almost 20 organizations that provide skills and digital services in emergency settings, such as us- ing data from social media to identify the immediate needs of communities. Information sharing through new technolo- gy and networks is also becoming more common among hu- manitarian organizations, such as the Humanitarian Genome project,viii which is developing a search engine for evaluations and best practices to strengthen emergency response. The DHN aims to be a “consortium of Volunteer & Technical Communities (V&TCs) and to provide an interface between formal, professional humanitarian organizations and infor- mal yet skilled-and-agile volunteer & technical networks.”ix Members specialize in services ranging from mapping to translation, contributing to data capture and analysis for humanitarian response. Background The recent UN OCHA report on Humanitarianism in the Network Age (HINA) covers the key discussions and insights regarding technology and process innovations affecting hu- manitarian work in the field. The most notable point made by this report concerns the opportunity to enable two-way communication with affected populations and to engage them in making decisions and finding solutions. The report makes four key points: • Information is a basic need in humanitarian response. • How humanitarian information is collected, shared, and analyzed needs to change fundamentally. • There is a need for new capacities and ways of thinking to understand and use new information sources. • New technologies bring new risks, and humanitarians need to develop guidelines to ensure that information is used in an ethical and secure manner. Mobile phone technology has become cheaper and more available, accounting for a rise in subscriptions to an esti- mated 95.5% of the world’s population, with an estimated 3 billion actual users by the end of 2014.x Innovations have piggybacked onto this technology, expanding access to information and communication for humanitarian agen- cies, affected populations and other stakeholders during a response. Research into a vast range of mobile product and process innovation includes development of mobile health diagnosis and treatment, and new ideas for water point monitoring and distribution. The use of SMS and mobile networks has already shown success for money transfer and capture of mass data that can be fed into online social media and data analysis. Reflections on the process The story of the DHN shows the importance of individuals as drivers of innovations and ideas. Innovation thinkers Andrej Verity (OCHA) and Patrick Meier founded the network.Pg. 15/30: Process and product innovations often work closely together: it is common to hear people speaking about product innovations that will solve a multitude of process issues or vice versa (Ramalingam et al 2009). The use of cash in emergencies, for example, has been followed by product innovations such as mobile money transfer technology, which have enhanced the effectiveness of the process innovation."	Damage & Need Assessment	Rapid Diagnostic	Communication	Mobile																																											Oxfam Crises in a New World Order.pdf	"Pg. 7/32: Box 1: New technology New technology improves early warning systems and spreads them around the world. Even in some of the poorest countries, affected people use cell phones and SMS messages to communicate and transfer cash by phone – though access to such technology varies from crisis to crisis, and by gender, with men dominating the tweets from recent crises. Humanitarian agencies are using satellite imagery and constantly-improving innovations like crowd-sourcing, web-based maps using data from social media, and much else. In 2011, the Office for Co-ordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) used such crisis-mapping in Libya. In some cities, UNHCR keeps in touch with refugees by text. Humanitarians and information experts are only beginning to apply such technologies as useful tools, but the potential to do so appears great."	Early Warning	Mobile	Online Cash	Mobile	Damage & Need Assessment	Crowdsourcing	Damage & Need Assessment	Imagery (UAV/Satellite)																																							role of business and private sector.pdf	"Pg. 11/37: There is reason to believe that private sector engagement can help contribute to breakthroughs in several areas of humanitarian response.Pg. 18/37: Box 3: Multi-stakeholder partnerships and the case of Mission 4636 in Haiti In some cases collaboration does not solely involve private firms or businesses and aid agencies. After the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, SMS was used to monitor information related to humanitarian needs in order to feed into humanitarian efforts (Munro, 2013). The system, ‘Mission 4636’, involved not only mobile network operators and international aid agencies but also Haitian NGOs, social enterprises, multinational companies, universities, unions and corporate foundations. The initiative ‘relied on a large group of Kreyol and French-speaking volunteers working on crowdsourcing platforms to translate, categorise and extract essential information from the text messages; the structured data was then streamed back to the relief effort in Haiti’ (Bailey, 2014: 11). The large volume of information gathered through Mission 4636 and other platforms was used in mapping exercises.Pg. 12/37: The same applies, in some respects, to ‘big data’, geospatial imaging, crowdsourcing and other new technologies developed by private firms both independently and in partnership with aid agencies (ACAPS, 2013; Decker, 2013). For instance, in Haiti the telecommunications company Digicel and a partner, Flowminder, used network data to track populations displaced by the 2010 earthquake (Bailey, 2014; GSMA, 2013)."	Communication	Mobile	Damage & Need Assessment	Crowdsourcing 	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics	Damage & Need Assessment	Crowdsourcing 																																							[Save the Children] Futures Under Threat_ The impact of the education crisis on Syria's children.pdf	"Pg. 23/44: USING INNOVATION FOR EFFECTIVE CASE MANAGEMENT With the huge numbers of children requiring access to education with varied situations and complex needs, it is becoming increasingly difficult to manage, track, monitor and refer their cases for effective response. To address this issue, Save the Children is piloting a new online platform in Jordan called the Education and Beneficiaries Support Information System (EBSIS) to streamline processes and bring greater efficiency and effectiveness in responding to children’s education needs. The EBSIS platform can be accessed through any smart device and allows real-time data entry, avoiding duplication and facilitating referrals internally and to other organisations. We are able to track the status of cases and generate information on why children are out of school and what is hindering their enrolment. This helps decision-makers identify what the critical issues are in certain areas and prioritise our response. We hope to scale up the programme with other partners in the education sector in the near future and build a shared information portal and referral and monitoring system.Pg. 23/44: USING INNOVATION FOR EFFECTIVE CASE MANAGEMENT With the huge numbers of children requiring access to education with varied situations and complex needs, it is becoming increasingly difficult to manage, track, monitor and refer their cases for effective response. To address this issue, Save the Children is piloting a new online platform in Jordan called the Education and Beneficiaries Support Information System (EBSIS) to streamline processes and bring greater efficiency and effectiveness in responding to children’s education needs. The EBSIS platform can be accessed through any smart device and allows real-time data entry, avoiding duplication and facilitating referrals internally and to other organisations. We are able to track the status of cases and generate information on why children are out of school and what is hindering their enrolment. This helps decision-makers identify what the critical issues are in certain areas and prioritise our response. We hope to scale up the programme with other partners in the education sector in the near future and build a shared information portal and referral and monitoring system."	Education/Awareness	Interactive Learning																																													"SG Report on International cooperation on humanitarian assistance in the field of natural disasters, from relief to development.pdf"	Pg. 5/10: Early warning systems ensure that communities are helped before they erode their productive assets.	Early Warning	Mobile																																													SG Report on Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance.pdf	"Pg. 7/20: During the reporting period, humanitarian agencies and partners continued to find ways to better harness information and technology to benefit people affected by crises as well as responders. Greater attention was given to communicating with communities through all available channels, including radio, television, text messaging and newsletters, to deliver vital information and ensure that responders receive information from affected communities. For example, in the aftermath of Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs of the Secretariat worked with a global and national network of telecommunications providers and humanitarian partners to reach some 1.2 million people with life-saving information and to open channels of communication for vital feedback on the provision of assistance.Pg. 12/20: Already, innovative approaches are being driven by Governments and people affected by crisis — such as the text messaging-based post-disaster early warning system for disease in the Philippines."	Communication	Radio	Early Warning	Mobile																																											Shrinking the Supply Chain - Hyperlocal Manufacturing and 3D printing in Humanitarian Response.pdf	"Pg. 4/16: KEY MESSAGES: • Demand for humanitarian aid has increased dramatically in recent years, and an estimated 60-80 percent of the cost is spent on logistics. • As demand for humanitarian assistance rises, the sector’s dependence on complex interna- tional supply chains presents a number of challenges including: sudden and unpredictable spikes in demand, difficult to access locations, disruptions due to conflict or disasters, as well as normal supply chain problems of leakage, spoilage, and other losses. • Current solutions target either 1) the efficiency and effectiveness of the supply chain or 2) reducing the need for foreign goods through local sourcing or cash transfers. • However, these efforts fail to resolve some key problems: - Even when supply-chains are improved, they remain vulnerable to disruption and delay, particularly when a crisis is cross-border in nature. - The large scale influx of relief goods can disrupt local markets and economies. - While commercial supply chains are driven by customer demand, in a humanitarian emer- gency the lack of market forces and clear information makes it hard to provide the correct quantities and types of goods difficult. - The pressures of logistics tend to favour large-scale, standardized resources which fail to address local cultural preferences or the need for one-off products or replacement parts. • There is an opportunity for new technology or strategies to simultaneously reduce reliance on complex international supply chain, empower local markets, and provide tailored goods and products, by producing needed goods at the “hyperlocal” level. • These tools include high-tech applications such as 3D printing and low-tech solutions such as producing goods from recycled and local materials. Many of these technologies are only just beginning to be used in humanitarian response. But existing pilot projects, particularly in the areas of specialized items and prototyping, combined with the ever-increasing availability and affordability of the technology, indicate great potential. To catalyse and accelerate this progress, the humanitarian community should: • Encourage a broader research agenda around hyper-local manufacturing such as 3-D printing. • Expand support for innovation through increased funding and technical assistance to help scale projects • Engage with the private sector to develop customised technologies for humanitarian response. • Foster linkages and collaboration within and beyond the humanitarian community, though specialized networks, social media, and open source design libraries.Pg. 5/16: PART I: Introduction The demand for humanitarian aid has grown dramat- ically in recent years. In 2013, major natural disasters in 109 countries affected 97 million people, many of them in remote locations.1 Conflicts such as the Syrian civil war are also driving mass displacement and humanitarian crises, contributing to over 51 million currently displaced people worldwide. At the centre of any response to these problems are the logistical challenges of getting the right goods to the right people, in the right place and at the right time. Logistics is not only central to any assistance project, it is also the most expensive part. An estimated 60-80 percent of the cost of hu- manitarian aid is spent on logistics, amounting to US$10-15 billion per year.2 Many of these goods are procured in wealth- ier countries and supplied to disaster zones, often without considering the impact on local the local economy or the unique needs of individuals or communities. Humanitarian operations must contend not only with the challenges of moving vast amounts of goods over long dis- tances, but also with difficult and disrupted environments, unexpected and huge unmet needs, and a slow adoption of technology. Much of the effort to solve these problems has focused on improving efficiency and effectiveness, as well as strategies to engage with and develop local markets.Pg. 5/16: 1 Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters, CRED Crunch: Disas- ter Data, Issue No. 35, (April 2014). 2 Peter Tatham, and S.J. Pettit, “Transforming humanitarian logistics: the journey to supply network management”, International Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, Vol. 40 No. 8/9 (2010), pp. 609-622.Pg. 5/16: However, new technologies and approaches are opening up the possibility of hyper-local manufacturing: producing required items where they are needed, such as in a health clinic, a workshop or a displaced persons settlement. Although new technologies such as three-dimensional (3D) printing are only beginning to be used in development and humanitarian contexts, they are spreading rapidly and have considerable potential. While traditional forms of logistics will remain central to humanitarian response, 3D printing and other hyperlocal production techniques have the po- tential to improve efficiency, while better engaging affected people, and building local capacity. This paper starts by looking at the challenges faced by humanitarian supply chains, efforts to address them, and remaining gaps. The paper next looks at the potential for hy- per-local approaches as well as new technologies, and addi- tive manufacturing in particular, to transform the landscape, before proposing broad recommendations for building on these promising opportunities.Pg. 8/16: PART II: New approaches to providing humanitarian relief goods While much of the recent focus on technology for human- itarian response has been on information and communi- cations, the benefits of digital technology are increasingly coming to the physical world. Although many of these tech- nologies are at an early stage, they are developing exponen- tially, helped by rising computing power and falling prices, leading some to talk about a “Third Industrial Revolution” underway.13 Additive manufacturing (3D Printing) in humanitarian response A centrepiece of these developments is additive manufac- turing, more commonly known as 3D printing. This term refers to a range of technologies and processes that have in common the potential to build an object without a prede- termined mold. The most basic form of 3D printing is “fused deposition modelling”, where a plastic filament (or otherPg. 8/16: 13 Jeremy, Rifkin, The Zero Marginal Cost Society, (New York, Palgrave Mac-Millan, 2014).Pg. 8/16: material) is heated and extruded to build an object. There are many different types of 3D printing technologies and al- though systems are available that build objects out of metal or ceramic (and other materials such as wood, silicon and concrete), and even human and animal cells for biomedical printing these can require complex systems and are not the immediate focus of this paper. Smaller commercial systems, because of their relative simplicity and portability seem to offer the best uses in humanitarian settings, but in the future larger industrial-scale printers may be increasingly available (through private companies, government or mili- taries) in a crisis. 3D Printing offers a number of benefits including flexibility and adaptability due to the proximity of manufacturer to user and an ability to fine tune objects following the pro- duction of a prototype solution, Although the 3D printer was invented in the mid-1980s, it took until 2005 before the process spread from industrial to personal and other uses, and then another half-dozen years to become widely available.14 First gaining popularity in the “maker” and “open source” movements, a number ofPg. 8/16: devices are now available such as Makerbot, Printrbot and Ultimaker. The number, sophistication and utility of models are set to expand as commercial entities increasingly rely on 3D printing for tasks such as prototyping. There are projects underway to print everything from food to human organs.Pg. 8/16: 14 Dale Dougherty, “A brief history of personal 3D printing”, Make: Special Edition. (Winter 2014).Pg. 9/16: Local manufacture of humanitarian relief goods Because it allows for rapid and customized manufacture, with the most basic forms requiring relatively little set-up or training, depending on the complexity of the output required, 3D printing has the potential to reduce the cost and increase the flexibility of humanitarian logistics. First, by manufacturing at the point of use, humanitarians can avoid ordering products that may take months to transport and clear customs. Second, transporting raw filament or other material is efficient, requiring limited packaging and lessPg. 9/16: space then finished goods (i.e. a high mass to volume ratio). Finally, 3D printing allows for on-the-spot customization, which can meet the unique needs of affected individuals while promoting interoperability between equipment with minor differences in pipe bore sizes, screw threads, etc.15 Field Ready, a US-based NGO dedicated to bringing manu- facturing to the point of use in humanitarian response, has identified practical items that can be made at or near where they are needed most (see Figure 2).Pg. 10/16: While to date most commercial 3-D printers have used a simple plastic filament (usually ABS16 or PLA17), the range and quality of materials that can be used is expanding rapidly. The emerging range of materials such as nylon, carbon-reinforced PLA, memory foam and and others will allow for printing more robust objects or those with unique properties (such as elasticity).18 Printers for metal and other materials also exist but are generally industrial-size and are significantly more expensive and complex to operate. Current humanitarian projects have focused on producing relatively simple objects, such as clips that hold plastic sheeting closed for shower stalls, replacement pump parts or latrine cover hinges. While many of these items are small,Pg. 10/16: 16 Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) is a common thermoplastic polymer. 17 Polylactide (PLA) is a biodegradable thermoplastic aliphatic polyester 18 Examples include Proto Pasta – carbon fiber-reinforced PLA; ProtoPar- adigm – magnetic PLA; ColorFabb – XT copolyester; ColorFabb- special fills, bamboo, wood, bronze, copper glow; Recreus – Filaflex elastomer; Taulman – nylon, etc. and 3D printed memory foam.Pg. 10/16: they can account for a sizable portion of goods brought into an emergency and can be critical for effective use of other products, such as tarps. In addition, much more sophisti- cated items are increasingly possible, notably prosthetic limbs and other medical devices (see Box 1).19 In addition, 3-D printers can also be used to produce component parts for more sophisticated tools. For example, 3-D printed cases can be combined with electronic components that are in- creasingly available in most country (or at least much easier to import than finished electronics) to produce small com- puters, controllers or sensors, such as water quality testers.20Pg. 10/16: 19 See www.fieldready.org  20 http://www.3ders.org/articles/20141124-open-source-3d-printed-wa- ter-quality-tester.htmlPg. 11/16: Figure 1 showed a common framework for supply chains, with six closely linked phases. 3D printing allows improve- ments, efficiencies and shortcuts at virtually every phase (see Figure 3), reducing time and space requirements and complexity while providing greater flexibility. The technology also has the capacity to address environmental, labor and safety concerns (such as through recycling) while building local capacities. A number of pilot projects have started to explore the use of 3D printers to produce these types of goods, although there have been as yet no production at scale. For exam- ple, in Haiti, Field Ready, supported by the Humanitarian Innovation Fund (HIF), is producing medical disposables and training locals in the technology, with the goal of signifi- cantly reducing procurement costs and transport time.21 A separate HIF-funded project in Kenya is working with Oxfam Great Britain to do field testing of production of parts for WASH projects.22Pg. 11/16: 21 “Rapid manufacturing for quick onset disasters”, available from http:// www.humanitarianinnovation.org/projects/small/Field-Ready 22 “A field trial of 3D Printing to assess its potential for improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the humanitarian response”, available from http://www.humanitarianinnovation.org/projects/small/Griffith-UniPg. 11/16: Box 1: Prosthetic limbs in Sudan and Syria To demonstrate that 3D printing technology is applicable to a humanitarian setting, the US-based Not Impossible Labs decided to help a Sudanese boy who lost both of his arms in a bomb attack. With financial help from Intel and Precipart, and the collaboration of Richard van As, co-inventor of a mechanical solution called the Robo- hand, and Tom Catena, an American surgeon working in the area, they created a 3D-printed prosthetic limb for the boy. Their inspiring project also left behind a pair of printers and trained locals to produce more prosthetics, extending the life and impact of the project. The Innovation & Planning Agency (IPA) is running a 3D-printed prosthetics pilot in Jordan, assisting Syrian refugees, Jordanians, Iraqis and Yemenis. IPA is testing and improving new open-source designs that look more natural, such as the FlexyHand, since aesthetics are an especially critical driver of social acceptance in the re- gion. The organization is also developing an open-source superhero hand for children with embedded electronics, and it is testing new materials such as a durable co-poly- ester filament and a 3D-printable memory foam material for lower limb sockets. Taking an open innovation ap- proach, IPA is experimenting with an advanced algorithmPg. 12/16: for parametric 3D modeling that was donated by a skilled programmer. The algorithm could allow hospital staff to design a custom prosthetic in an advanced parametric model in 15 minutes without having to learn challenging parametric design software. IPA seeks to build a scalable program by training leading hospitals, clinics and INGOs in Jordan, while also building an online co-creation plat- form providing open-source documentation, videos, photos and forums in English and Arabic for hospitals, patients and social entrepreneurs.Pg. 12/16: Facilitating research and development 3D printing technology also allows the rapid prototyping of ideas, enabling innovation on the fly. Because of the ease of sharing and manipulating the digital files used for 3D print- ing, ideas in one location can be easily duplicated or repur- posed. While 3D printing requires training (despite ongoing efforts to make software and printers more user-friendly), it is simple enough that affected communities can develop their own ideas to address humanitarian or livelihood needs. For example, Oxfam and MyMiniFactory.com, a free library of 3D-printable objects, have launched a project to help with the rapid design, manufacturing and testing of items to address the water hygiene issues of Syrian refugees in Lebanon. In May 2014 designers from around the world were invited to submit Hand Washing Device designs. The select- ed designs were emailed to humanitarian workers for testing and feedback.23 The final design will be mass-produced using conventional manufacturing techniques.Pg. 12/16: 23 “Oxfam teams with MyMiniFactory to provide humanitarian aid in Syria, using 3D printing”, 8 May 2014, http://3Dprint.com/3400/syrian-crisis-ox- fam/Pg. 12/16: Limitations to current 3D printing Cost is a particular issue, as basic fused deposition model- ling printers cost around $1000-$3000 – although this price is fast reducing in line with Moore’s Law – while the filament (the medium in which objects are made) can cost US$25-80 per kilogram, and can also raise environmental concerns. Efforts are underway to produce filament more cheaply and sustainably from recycled materials (see Box 2 below). Machines that can produce filament from plastic bottles al- ready cost less than $300,24 so on-site production of filament from waste and debris after a disaster has the potential to provide economic and environmental benefits. A second issue is durability, as the low cost, desktop ma- chines are fairly fragile and often unreliable. Developing units that are robust and resistant to the dust, moisture and extremes of temperature will be critical. There are also potential security concerns, particularly in unstable contexts. Bomb or gun components, or even crude operational firearms, could be a concern,25 as these untrace- able non-metallic weapons can get around security mecha- nisms (e.g. checkpoints) and policies (e.g. sanctions).26 This concern remains largely hypothetical however, and as with any dual-use technology, proper monitoring and safeguards would limit practical risks in most situations. Finally, it is important to appreciate the importance of correct and appropriate design for the 3D printed parts. For example in the case of WASH equipment, the item must be able to withstand the operating pressure lest it ruptures and causes death or injury. Such issues are routinely considered as part of the traditional design and production process, but there is a clear danger that the ability to print on demand will lead to unsafe practices in this regard. 24 See “Turning old plastic into 3D printer filament is greener than conventional recycling”, (2014). Available from http://www.3ders.org/ articles/20140304-turning-old-plastic-into-3d-printer-filament-is-green- er-than-conventional-recycling.html 25 Andy Greenburg, “How 3D Printed Guns Evolved Into Serious Weapons in Just One Year,” Wired (May 15, 2014). Available from http://www.wired. com/2014/05/3d-printed-guns/ 26 Gustav Lindstrom, “Why should we care about 3D-printing and what are potential security implications?” GCSP Policy Paper (2014). Available from http://issuu.com/thegcsp/docs/gcsp_policy_paper-3d_print- ing-linds/4?e=8641782/9654566Pg. 13/16: Fabrication labs and alternatives to 3D printing In all the buzz around 3D printing, it is easy to forget that it is simply a tool and that there are other, often better, ways to make the same objects. Alternatives include laser cutters and milling machines, all of which benefit from the advances in digital design and control that drive 3D printing. These are “subtractive” in nature, in that tools remove bits, slices and fragments from pieces of wood, metal or plastic, rather than add material as a 3D printer does. While these more tradi- tional tools are heavier, generate more waste, are generally require more training than 3D printing, they will likely remain a critical part of future hyper-local manufacturing systems. For example, mobile fabrication labs (“fab labs”) bring togeth- er tools that include 3D printers, computer-assisted milling machines, laser cutters, and welding gear. A Mobile Fab Lab created at MIT in 200727 combines computer-aided design and manufacturing with traditional machines in a contain-27 See “Mobile fab lab hits the road”, http://web.mit.edu/spotlight/mo-bile-fablab/Pg. 13/16: erized trailer. The US Military deployed its Expeditionary Lab  Mobile to Afghanistan, a mix of equipment in a 20-foot con- tainer, manned by two engineers, with generators, satellite communications and other gear.28 These labs allow produc- tion and repairs far beyond what 3D printers can do alone, offering a promising model for humanitarian operations. 3D scanning  Another complementary technology is 3-D scanning, which allows the rapid creation of digital models of physical ob- jects. The digital models can then be used to 3-D print or oth- erwise manufacture replicas or physical models of the orig- inal object. 3-D models can be produced from conventional cameras, lidar, or from a range of new dedicated scanners, which are increasingly portable and inexpensive. One recent example of this was the work of the Field Innovation Team after a major mudslide in Oso, Washington, USA. A small unmanned aerial vehicle was used to capture a 3-D image of the area affected by the mudslide. This was then printed and used to facilitate planning of recovery efforts. Alternatively, the digital models themselves can be used for analysis, let- ting people work remotely and limiting the number of people who have to come to the physical site of a disaster. Low-tech approaches to local manufacturing  Local design and manufacture long predates the prolifer- ation of 3D printing. Designers and humanitarian workers have drawn on concepts of appropriate technology,29 par- ticipation, and human-centred design and decision-making to create a rich variety of solutions to common problems, including: • In collaboration with UNHCR in Rwanda, in 1994 archi- tect Shigeru Ban began developing shelters made from cardboard tubing, which could be easily put together by untrained workers. • I-Beam Architecture and Design developed a design for a house that could be produced rapidly with minimal tools out of the shipping pallets used to transport other materi- als, in response to the Kosovo crisis in 1999. 28 “U.S. Army Deploying Mobile FabLabs,” 6 March 2013, http://3dprintingin- dustry.com/2013/03/06/u-s-army-deploying-mobile-fablabs/ 29 See, e.g., Eric Schumacher, Small is Beautiful: A Study of Economics As if People Mattered. (London, Blond and Briggs, 1973)Pg. 14/16: • Potters for Peace, a US-based NGO, works with low-in- come artisans in Central America to make ceramic water filters,30 a basic form of additive manufacturing. Novel designs, sometimes facilitated with digital modelling, may be mixed with traditional construction techniques and locally available or recycled materials. However, there are few examples of these approaches being used on a large scale in disasters. One notable exception is the work being done by the My Shelter Foundation in the Philippines.31 This group originally adopted the “Liter of Light” system that uses plastic bottles filled with water and bleach to refract light into homes, providing 55 watts of brightness. This was then expanded so that the original solar bulb was supplemented with a solar-powered LED to keep the light on at night. The organization also developed a simple street lighting system, critical for creating a safe environment in camps or disaster affected areas. Rather than rely on expensive and time-con- suming imports of completed lighting systems, however, My Shelter Foundation developed training kits to teach communities how to build the simple night lighting systems by hand. Trainings in the Philippines were conducted with partners like the Technical Education Skills and Develop- ment Authority, a nationwide government entity that trains young people. Micro-solar panels or solarettes, widely available in the Philippines, and other parts, are assembled 30See http://pottersforpeace.com/ 31 See http://aliteroflight.org/Pg. 14/16: by hand, using components easily accessible in most cities. The kits could therefore be rapidly produced and lighting restored to disaster-affect- ed communities, shelters or IDP camps soon after a disaster. After Typhoon Yolanda in December 2013, the project distributed thousands of lights to poor communities in Leyte and Samitar and other affected areas. As promising as these approaches are, it will be necessary to fully assess the effectiveness of dif- ferent methods against conventional techniques, and to integrate these methods into planning processes. For example, using low-tech water pu- rification technology32 might reduce the need for imports of bottled water; if bottled water is being brought into an emergency, there should also be plans in place to re-use the plastic bottles for lights, conversion to filament or other uses. Exploring and finding ways to scale these techniques appropriately will be a critical part of realizing the promise of hyper-local manufacturing.Pg. 14/16: Future of hyper-local manufacturing technology The use of 3D printers in hyper-local manufacturing is still in its early days. In the near future, the source materials that can be used will increase dramatically, allowing production of items as different as vehicle parts and skin grafts. The US military is even looking at 3D printed food, which could provide nutrition tailored to specific individuals.33 Intriguing examples of the possibilities include: • Using readily available raw materials and solar power, such as in the Solar Sinter Project created by art student Marcus Kayser, which created a bowl out of sand using natural sunlight and photovoltaic cells. 32 See “15 Concepts and Solutions for Providing Clean Drinking Water”, 16 May 2012, available from http://www.treehugger.com/gadgets/con- cepts-providing-clean-drinking-water.html and “The ‘Origami’ Inclined Plate Settler”. Available from http://www.humanitarianinnovation.org/ projects/large-grants/origami 33 Jane Benson, “Chow from a 3-D printer? Natick researchers are working on it”, 18 July 2014 Available from http://www.army.mil/article/130154/ Chow_from_a_3_D_printer__Natick_researchers_are_working_on_it/Pg. 15/16: • Printing of objects as large and complicated as a house, which has already been achieved by architect Enrico Dini and by WinSun, a Chinese company. • 4D printing, which allows materials to “self-assemble” into 3D structures. Applications might include auto-erecting structures (such as health clinics and bridges), self-fixing in- frastructure, and water systems that unfold automatically. With the exponential development of the technology, humanitarian professionals must be able to articulate their needs and build partnerships with academics and private companies to realize the potential in these concepts. An example of this might be the proposed ‘intelligent hub’ with industrial designers and 3D printing specialists that is being developed at Griffith University in Australia to support 3D operators and operations in field locations. Conclusions The challenges of humanitarian response are mounting, while available logistical approaches are inefficient, rigid, and can hurt local economies. Hyperlocal manufacturing, and 3D printing in particular, has the potential to revolution- ize the humanitarian endeavour. We are likely only at the inflection point of exponential growth that will make these tools easier to use, inexpensive and widely available. To help ensure that hyper-local manufacturing technology benefits those affected by disasters, the humanitarian com- munity can help catalyse and accelerate progress by:"	Supply	3D Printers	Shelter	Rapid Shelters																																											Summary Report 2013 West and Central Africa OCHA Regional Policy Forum.pdf	"Pg. 4/18: The final panellist, Okey Uzoechina, introduced the Forewarn Initiative-- an innovative project aiming to enhance disaster risk reduction (DRR) by supporting ECOWAS advance structures for early warning, such as tracking and analysing conflicts and instability, as well as coastal flooding and natural hazards. The Forewarn Initiative promotes a strategic approach and works across eleven ECOWAS directorates with the humanitarian directorate in the lead. The Initiative works vertically to promote information-sharing and learning at the regional and national level. There were three major on-going projects within the Forewarn Initiative: the Organizational Self-Assessment Tool (OSAT), which revealed that early warning data around conflicts was good, but that the analysis was not integrated into the broader work and the capacity to track, anticipate and prepare for disaster and humanitarian risk specifically was not well developed. The OSAT is being used to promote an on- going review process, and the Forewarn Initiative has expanded the list of early warning indicators beyond conflict to include disaster and humanitarian indicators; the two other projects within the Initiative are a regional mapping exercise on transnational disaster risks and a risk reduction index that is being rolled out in seven ECOWAS member states. Overall, in order to improve early warning systems, there is a need to leverage resources from existing institutions; strengthen partnerships and information sharing across national, country and local levels; and to use two-way communication to reach vulnerable areas and increase community participation in early warning processes.Pg. 14/18: • Consider alternative approaches to how we think about humanitarian response, such as insurance, risk management, cash transfers, etc."	Early Warning	Risk Management	Online Cash	Mobile																													x														Think_Brief_001_Spread_Template_Final_08.pdf	"Pg. 5/14: At the same time, rapid advances in technology and the increasing diversity of humanitarian actors are creating new opportunities and disruptions to the way assistance is being delivered. There is no shortage of promising ideas for improving humanitarian action: the use of big data and social media analytics for needs assessment, digital volunteer networks, community-led risk mapping, advanced water filters, local production with 3-D printers, etc. Some of these approaches have the potential to transform the system. For example, cash transfers empowered by mobile technology could upend the sector-by-sector approach. Similarly, insurance and risk management models could alter the way that humanitarian disasters are funded and planned for. The humanitarian system of the future will look very different from that of today.Pg. 7/14: Humanitarian innovations Community Management of Acute Malnutrition: An approach to treating malnutrition in people’s homes, using ready-to-use therapeutic food (RUTF) as opposed to central feeding centres where diseases spread easily. Digital humanitarians: Using volunteer and technical communities, like the Digital Humanitarian Network, to produce detailed maps and support information management remotely in an emergency. Rapid Market Analysis: Methodologies like the Emergency Market Mapping and Analysis Toolkit (EMMA), improve response by assisting relief agencies to better understand, support and make use of local market-systems in disaster zones."	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics	Supply	3D Printers	Damage & Need Assessment	Crowdsourcing 																																									Unmanned Aerial Vehicles in Humanitarian Response OCHA July 2014.pdf	"Pg. 4/20: KEY MESSAGES: • Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), also known as remotely piloted aircraft or “drones” are small aircraft that fly by remote control or autonomously. Although previously associated with the military, UAVs are increasingly performing civilian tasks as the technology becomes more com- mon – 57 countries and 270 companies were producing UAVs in 2013. In the U.S., the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) forecast that some 7,500 commercial small UAVs could be flying in the U.S. within five years. • Humanitarian organizations have started to use UAVs, including in Haiti and the Philippines, for data collection and information tasks that include real time information and situation mon- itoring, public information and advocacy, search and rescue, and mapping. • The most likely humanitarian application in the area of delivery and logistics would be delivery of small medical supplies, such as vaccines. • The use of UAVs raises serious practical and ethical issues that humanitarian organizations must address through transparency, community engagement, and guidelines for privacy and data security. • Developing safeguards and guidance for the use of UAVs in conflict settings, whether strictly for humanitarian purposes or for protection and human rights work, will be a significant chal- lenge. The humanitarian system should therefore focus on uses in natural disasters and early recovery settings. • As more peacekeeping and military actors acquire UAVs, humanitarians will need to have clear guidance and common positions on when it is appropriate to use those capacities. • To tap into the growing interest in UAVs, particularly in technical communities, humanitarian organizations should engage in networks that promote good practices and guidance, and that can serve as a source of surge capacity. • Despite their potential to enhance humanitarian operations, more research and evidence is needed to identify the comparative advantages of using UAVs. More research is needed on in- tegrating aerial observation and data collection into needs and damage assessments, search and rescue, and other humanitarian functions.Pg. 5/20: Until recently, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, or UAVs, had been largely associated in the public mind with military uses, particularly armed attacks. However, increasing civilian use by hobbyists, researchers and others has started to change perceptions. UAVs, also known as remotely piloted aircraft or drones, are already used commercially for agriculture,1 surveying,2 wildlife monitoring and conservation,3 real es- tate assessments4 and other areas. Civilian use is likely to rise, with one study estimating that the agricultural market for UAVs could be up to ten times the public safety market.5 UAVs are reaching a critical juncture in their development, as regulations emerge in many countries and the technology becomes affordable enough for mass use. Despite the visceral response that many have to the idea of “eyes in the sky”, interest is building in using UAVs in hu- manitarian response. Manufacturers are marketing UAVs as “life-saving technology” for humanitarians6 to build legiti- macy, as a new generation of start-ups is developing tech- nology for humanitarian use. Portable micro-UAVs have already been deployed by hu- manitarian actors in Haiti and the Philippines after Typhoon Yolanda for mapping, improved situational awareness and needs assessment. While primary uses are data-collection and monitoring, research is underway on the delivery of goods, particularly smaller items such as vaccines. 1 http://www.dailyfinance.com/2013/12/08/northrop-grumman-wants-to- sell-unmanned-drones-to/ 2 http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2013/12/131202-drone-uav-ua s-amazon-octocopter-bezos-science-aircraft-unmanned-robot/ 3 http://wwf.panda.org/?205266/Unmanned-Aerial-Vehi- cle-to-aid-Nepals-Conservation-Efforts 4http://www.auav.com.au/services/realestate/ 5Ibid. 6 Kristin Bergtora Sandvik and Kjersti Lohne (2014), The Rise of the Hu- manitarian Drone: Giving Content to an Emerging Concept (forthcoming); Millennium: Journal of International Studies.Pg. 5/20: Peacekeeping and military actors are also increasingly inter- ested in using UAVs to support mission mandates, including the protection of civilians. The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Con- go (MONUSCO) recently began using its own long-range UAVs for reconnaissance and data-gathering tasks, and has made these capacities available to humanitarian agencies. This move from speculation to reality raises challenging questions around regulation, safety, privacy and how to best integrate UAVs into humanitarian response. Answering these questions will require developing coherent policies, legal frameworks and good practices for engaging with affected communities. This report will outline potential uses of UAVs in humanitar- ian response and emerging issues. It will also consider how humanitarians should engage with the capacities offered by UAVs used by peacekeepers or militaries in humanitar- ian contexts. The report will not cover the legal and ethical implications of armed UAVs or other autonomous weapons systems, although the continuing debate over their use in armed attacks will surely have an impact on the acceptance of civilian uses.Pg. 6/20: UAVs come in a wide variety, but can be divided into classes based on size, range, and capacity for autonomous flight. While most are controlled remotely by a human pilot on the ground, some can fly along pre-set coordinates or patterns, or land if they lose contact with the pilot. Medium to large systems: These vehicles range from dozens of kilograms to the size of a manned plane. They can fly at high or medium altitudes for hours or days at a time, hundreds or thousands of miles from their operators. Costing from hundreds of thousands to millions of dollars, they re- quire sophisticated base stations and extensive pilot training. At the larger end, the Predator7 can fly up to 25,000 feet for 40 hours, guided via satellites by a pilot up to 7,500 miles away. The medium end includes the FALCO,8 deployed by MONUS-CO, capable of 14 hours of flight and a range of 155 miles9 from its base in Goma. Small systems (mini and micro-UAVs): These systems are small enough to be carried by one or two people, with some easily fitting in a backpack or weighing less than a kilogram. They can include both fix-wing aircraft, better at distance flying, and rotor aircraft that can hover. These systems are generally limited in range to anything from line of sight to a few kilometres, and to flight times under an hour. Operating these systems is much simpler, with little training required. Professional-grade systems can carry sophisticated camer- as and GPS equipment and increasingly have the capacity for autonomous flight, object avoidance and other safety features. Costs can range from $5,000 to several hundred thousand dollars, including analytical software and sup- port. Commercial-grade systems are sold to hobbyists and others for a few hundred to a few thousand dollars. These have limited range and will rarely have autonomous capacity 7 Known as the “MQ-1 Predator” drone or “Tier II”, the model is built by General Atomics and used primarily by the United States Air Force and the Central Intelligence Agency. See http://www.ga-asi.com/products/aircraft/predator.php 8 See http://www.selex-es.com/-/un-falco 9 “UN Starts to Use Drones to Monitor Rebels in DR Congo.” Africa News and Analysis. BBC, 03 Dec. 2013. Available from http://africajournalismthe- world.com/tag/monusco-drones/Pg. 6/20: beyond an automatic return function if the control signal is lost. Nonetheless, they can carry cameras and monitoring equipment and capacities are increasing rapidly. Due to their affordability, ease of transport, and regulatory concerns UAVs used in humanitarian response are likely to be small or micro-UAVs of up to a few kilograms, while larger systems will remain the province of military and civil-de- fence actors.Pg. 7/20: A UAVs already support disaster response and other humani- tarian work, and as the technology evolves new applications are emerging. Data collection and observation The most common use of UAVs in humanitarian response today is data-collection and observation. One provider thinks of UAVs as extensions of the IT infrastructure, call- ing them “data collecting solutions”. UAVs may offer major improvements in speed, accuracy and detail, at lower cost than satellite imagery or other existing tools. UAVs can be equipped with a wide range of monitoring equipment, from a strapped-on smartphone to infrared systems or Synthet- ic Aperture Radar (SAR) that can see through cloud cover, forest canopy or even buildings. The analysis of data from these devices ranges from straight-forward to quite techni- cally complex. Real time information and situation monitoring The most common use of UAVs is the provision of high-al- titude video feed or photos, allowing a rapid overview of conditions. More sophisticated systems can broadcast a live feed directly or over the internet. These images can assist in tasks that include: • rapid assessment of damage, such collapsed buildings or blocked roads (see case study 1) • monitoring distribution of goods, such as tarpaulins or tents • identifying and analysing temporary settlements or tracking displacement or movement of people Even the least expensive UAV systems can aid in these tasks, often using standard cameras.Pg. 7/20: Case Study 1: Damage Assessment in the Philippines after Typhoon Haiyan In November 2013, Super Typhoon Haiyan devastated the city of Tacloban in the Philippines. Soon after, a case the size of a backpack arrived, accompanied by a small team of experts. This pilot project to bring in a UAV, with a range of up to five kilometers and a high-resolution video camera, to assist humanitarian responders was the work of a partnership between several private sec- tor firms10 and NetHope, a consortium of NGOs,. The Philippines lacked the necessary regulations, so the use of the UAV was cleared by a special agreement with the Mayor of Tacloban.11 The UAV was covered with insur- ance that covered damage or injury due to malfunction. The UAV was used first to identify where to set up a base of operations,12 and then to check if roads were pass- able, a task that could take days when done on foot or by helicopter. The UAV was also flown up the coast to evaluate damage from storm surge and flooding and to see which villages had been affected. The aerial assess- ments “really helped to speed up ...efforts, cut down on wasted time and work, and make them more accurate in their targeting of assistance.”13 It was also suggested that the UAV might have located survivors in the rubble using infrared cameras if it had arrived within 72 hours. >> 10 Danoffice IT and Sky-watch. 11 “Peaceful drones.” Yahoo News Philippines, June 24, 2013. Available from http://ph.news.yahoo.com/peaceful-drones-163939037.html> 12 “In the Philippines, Drones Provide HumanitarianRelief,” ReliefWeb, 16 Dec. 2013, available from http://reliefweb.int/report/philippines/philip- pines-drones-provide-humanitarian-relief 13 Santos, Lean A. “Media.” Press Room » Press & Multimedia » NetHope. Devex, 16 Dec. 2013. Web. 08 July 2014. <http://nethope.org/media/press- room/in-the-philippines-drones-provide-humanitarian-relief>Pg. 8/20: Interest is building in developing local capacity for using UAVs in disaster response. SkyEye Inc., a local start-up, is working with the Ateneo de Manila University to train five teams across the Philippines to locally deploy UAVs in preparation for next typhoon season.14Pg. 8/20: 14 See http://www.skyeyeproject.com/Pg. 8/20: Public information and advocacy Imagery from even basic commercial UAV systems can pro- vide a powerful overview of the nature and scope of a situa- tion without expensive helicopter flights, using photography and video production that was impossible even a few years ago. This can provide a power tool for advocacy by showing the scale of the damage, the pace of a recovery or highlight- ing specific problems. For example, a photojournalist who had flown a UAV to capture image of the devastation in Ta- cloban immediately following Typhoon Haiyan, returned six months later and flew the UAV over the same routes, high- lighting how a lack of housing inland meant that many peo- ple had been forced to return to vulnerable coastal areas.15 Search and rescue Interest is building in the use of UAVs to assist in search and rescue, particularly when equipped with infrared, or other specialty cameras. For example, the European Union is fund- ing ICARUS, a research project to develop unmanned search and rescue tools to assist human teams.16Pg. 8/20: 15 “Typhoon Haiyan: Aerial Footage Shows How Tacloban Has Recovered Six Months on from the Natural Disaster.” The Telegraph. Telegraph Media Group, 06 May 2014. Available from http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/ worldnews/asia/philippines/10804117/Typhoon-Haiyan-aerial-footage- shows-how-Tacloban-has-recovered-six-months-on-from-the-natural- disaster.html 16 See http://www.fp7-icarus.eu/search-rescuePg. 8/20: Small portable UAV systems could accompany rescue teams to rapidly scan buildings for survivors. More elaborate inte- grated systems could potentially cover massive amounts of ground, though their effectiveness in a disaster has yet to be documented. To be useful, the UAVs and trained staff must be available within 24-48 hours of a sudden-onset disaster. In addition these technical approaches must be integrated into the protocols for rescue teams, agreements for importing dis- aster response equipment, the International Search and Rescue Advisory Group (INSARAG) guidelines and other areas of policy. Mapping UAVs can rapidly produce geo-references (GPS accurate) or 3D maps that are often more detailed and faster than satellite imagery. This mapping enables improved logistics, awareness of informal communities, damage assessments, disaster risk reduction or early warning activities, agricultur- al monitoring to promote food security, flood monitoring, etc. This type of mapping requires specialized equipment, software and training.Pg. 9/20: Case Study 2: Mapping and disaster risk reduction in Haiti Over the past four years, Haiti has endured a terrible earthquake, a cholera epidemic, and Hurricane Sandy. Each disaster not only caused many casualties but also changed the landscape of the country. Buildings, houses, public infrastructure and roads were totally destroyed, forcing thousands of people to seek refuge in growing encampments. For NGOs to respond to these types of crises, up-to-date imagery for aid distribution, recon- struction, and disaster mitigation is continuously need- ed. To get a quick and detailed idea of the country situ- ation, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) has been using several types of UAVs, including some that produce accurate topographical and 3-D maps. IOM has been using UAVs not just to support relief activ- ities, but also to prevent and reduce disaster risks and to strengthen community resilience. They have enabled IOM to: • register lands • assess destroyed houses • take a census of public buildings, shelters, hospitals and schools • assess damage caused by floods and droughts • monitor internally displaced persons (IDPs) and camps, enabling aid workers to know when shelters were empty and camps could be closed.Pg. 9/20: Immediately following Hurricane Sandy on 27-29 Oc- tober 2012, IOM made several flights in to assess de- stroyed and affected buildings in Butte Boyer, Tabarre. Images were processed in real time and cross-checked against older imagery and data, and by October 30 IOM was able to count how many houses had collapsed or been flooded. High-definition imagery enabled mapping of dumps, standing water where mosquitos and epidem- ics could thrive, road conditions, water points, latrines, and areas prone to floods. Working with the organization Drone Adventures, IOM was able to map dense shantytowns in Port-au-Prince, counting tents and organizing a door-to-door census. Without this detailed information, it would have been very difficult to identify aid requirements. All data from these projects is now available to aid workers in Haiti through OpenStreetMap.17 IOM has stressed that it was critical to sensitize the affected communities to the use of UAVs through regular community engagement, informing them of the mapping and explaining how the information is used.Pg. 10/20: Logistics and package-delivery Information collection may be just the first step, as the hu- manitarian community explores the use of UAVs for delivery of in-kind goods. The US military uses unmanned Kaman K-Max helicopters that can deliver over 2,700 kg in Afghan- istan,18 a few delivery projects have been tested in China,19 and pilot projects have been announced in Australia20 and New Zealand,21 by the US retailer Amazon,22 and others. Jack C. Chow, former Assistant Director-General of the World Health Organization, has suggested that UAVs “can supple- ment existing supply chains or provide emergency drops”.23 However, it is not yet clear that UAVs are better than conven- tional logistics and delivery systems. Commercial aircraft, helicopters and services like the United Nations Human- itarian Air Service are faster, carry heavier payloads and are more cost-efficient than large UAVs.24 Air-drops have a deservedly terrible reputation for safety and efficiency, and any autonomous delivery on the ground would still require trained staff, community engagement and substan- tial pre-planning to distribute and monitor goods. These requirements will be hard to meet if access is so bad that conventional vehicles can’t be used. Smaller UAV systems, such as those that can carry up to a few kilograms, are unlikely to be able to deliver useful quan-18 See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kaman_K-MAX 19 “China Could Become the First Country to Legalize Parcel Delivery by Drone.”Quartz. September 3, 2013 Available from http://qz.com/120654/ china-could-become-the-first-country-to-legalize-parcel-delivery-by- drone. 20 “Australia and China Are Way Ahead of Amazon in the Commercial Drone Race.”Quartz. December 2, 2013, available from http://qz.com/152788/ australia-and-china-are-way-ahead-of-amazon-in-the-commercial- drone-race/. 21 See http://aria-logistics.com/ooooby/ 22 See http://www.amazon.com/b?node=8037720011 23 “The Case for Humanitarian Drones: Response”, by Jack C. Chow, CDFAI, available at http://www.cdfai.org/sswghumanitariandrones.htm. 24 “The Case Against Humanitarian Drones”, by Nathaniel A. Raymond, Brittany Card, and Ziad Al Achkar, OpenCanada.org December 12, 2012 available from http://opencanada.org/features/the-think-tank/com- ments/the-case-against-humanitarian-drones/Pg. 10/20: tities of relief goods efficiently. Legal and regulatory issues are also greater for delivery UAVs, as they are heavier and thus more dangerous, liable to drop or lose packages, and have to be able to land safely in populated areas. This situ- ation may change in the future as the technology becomes cheaper and larger fleets of UAVs are able to coordinate. The Matternet project,25 for example, envisions a network of small UAVs and stations that would allow packages to be transported long-distances to remote areas with limited in- frastructure. However, Matternet and other envisioned deliv- ery services require an established infrastructure of stations, which makes them hard to set-up rapidly. One promising area is delivery of vaccines or other small medical supplies. The Gates Foundation has given a small grant to a team at the Harvard-MIT Division of Health Scienc- es and Technology to develop UAVs that can be deployed by health care workers via SMS to swiftly transport small quantities of vaccines to clinics or health workers in isolated locations when roads were out, or the quantities don’t justify a car or truck delivery. However, the researchers acknowl- edge that UAV delivery “is really useful if you are vaccinating only a small number of children each week, in a location where you cannot store vaccines for long periods” and that the range limits on small UAVs (perhaps 40 km) would make them unviable in areas where villages are too widely spaced, like much of DRC.26 Although delivery by UAVs is likely to advance quickly over the next five to ten years, it remains unclear whether, outside of limited deliveries of medical supplies, there is a clear case for developing technologies specifically for humanitarian response. 25 See http://matternet.us/ 26 “An interview with MIT’s UAV vaccine delivery team”, available at http:// www.technet-21.org/index.php/share/192-newsletter-content/tech- net-digest/wwwtechnet21orgissue-177/3501-can-uavs-be-used-to-trans- port-vaccines-to-remote-health-centres?tmpl=component&type=rawPg. 13/20: Use of UAVs by Peacekeeping Missions and Militaries While the use of UAVs by military components of peacekeep- ing missions or disaster responses is several years old, MON-USCO’s intitiative (see case study 3) marks their first formal in- tegration into a mission’s civilian structure. With 57 countries producing UAVs in 2013, and many more developing capaci-38 Stanford Law School and New York University Law School, Living Under Drones (September 2012). 39 Gallagher, Ryan. “Surveillance Drone Industry Plans PR Effort to Counter Negative Image.” The Guardian. Guardian News and Media, 03 Feb. 2012. <http://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/feb/02/surveillance-drone-in- dusty-pr-effort>. 40 At higher altitudes most UAVs can’t be seen, no matter what colour they are, the Huginn X-1 used in Tacloban, for example, is effectively invisible over 150 meters.Pg. 14/20: ty,41 humanitarian organizations are going to be increasingly offered access to UAVs and the information they collect. For UAVs that are operated by the military, existing interna- tional guidance, such as the Guidelines on the Use of Military and Civil Defence Assets to Support United Nations Human- itarian Activities in Complex Emergencies, Rev. 1 January 2006 (commonly known as the MCDA Guidelines), already require humanitarian organizations to ensure that: • any humanitarian civil-military relationship or interaction does not impact principled humanitarian action. • the use of military assets in support of humanitarian oper- ations is appropriate and in accordance with international guidelines, i.e. that military assets provide a unique ca- pability, availability and timeliness not possessed by the humanitarian community (i.e. “last resort”). In many cases, UAVs will clearly provide a “unique capa- bility”, particularly in areas where humanitarian access is restricted due to security or terrain. However, it is harder to show that the use of UAVs by military or peacekeeping actors will not impact humanitarian principles, because this depends on the perceptions of local communities and stake- holders, not the mission per se. Humanitarians will have to consider whether the military is a party to the conflict, and if association with them would impact the perceived or actual neutrality, impartiality and operational independence of the overall humanitarian effort. 41 UAV Roundup 2013, AEROSPACE AMERICA/JULY-AUGUST 2013Pg. 14/20: For UAVs within the civilian parts of peacekeeping missions, or perhaps those operated by national civil protection agen- cies, humanitarians will need to make a strategic decision whether the MCDA Guidelines apply, or whether the UAVs can be treated as a purely civilian asset. Factors to consider would be the degree of transparency, acceptance and commu- nity engagement around the UAV program. Is the community aware of overflights? Is data gathered being made available, at least in part? Is civil society supportive? This assessment may also change over the course of a mission, as active con- flict ends and peacebuilding activities start, for example. The use of UAVs by peacekeepers and other military partners is likely to increase. There have already been discussions about adding UAV capacity to other UN missions, including those in Côte d’Ivoire, Sudan, and South Sudan. Humani- tarian organizations that take a principled stand to reject military UAV capacities may even be criticized for not taking advantage of “life-saving technology”. As some analysts have argued, “soon human rights groups will actually be demanding that drones be included as a staple ingredient in peacekeeping operations.... [O]pting not to use drones could indeed someday be considered a breach of” interna- tional humanitarian law42 as a failure to take all measures to protect civilians and document violations. 42 Karlsrud, J and Rosén, F 2013. In the Eye of the Beholder? UN and the Use of Drones to Protect Civilians. Stability: International Journal of Security and Development 2(2):27,Pg. 15/20: Case Study 3: Peacekeeping in the Democratic Republic of CongoPg. 15/20: On January 2013, the Security Council approved the use of unarmed UAVs by the UN Organization Stabiliza- tion Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to promote peace and security, including monitoring the arms embargo.43 This move was a re- sponse to violence by more than two dozen armed groups, mostly in North and South Kivu, compounded by the difficulty of accessing vulnerable populations. While MONUSCO is first peacekeeping mission with its own UAVs, it was not the first with access to those capa- bilities.44 However, MONUSCO altered the previous mod- el of UAVs as purely military equipment, making them available for civilian uses and privately contracted, with the Falco UAVs and technical staff leased from the man- ufacturer, Selex ES. The systems have dual-use capacity, under the control of the civilian Special Representative of the Secretary-General rather than the Force Com- mander, and are available equally to civilian and military tasks. The UAVs provide various functions, including some with implications for humanitarian work:Pg. 15/20: 43 United Nations. S/RES/2098. New York: United Nations; March 28. 44 An earlier iteration of the DRC mission (MONUC) was supported by a Euro- pean force (EUFOR) with UAVs. One was shot down and the other crashed, killing one person and injuring others in Kinshasa. http://www.washing- tonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2006/10/03/AR2006100300778.html In 2009, the UN Mission in Chad and the Central African Republic (MINURCAT) briefly inherited drones as the mission transitioned to a full peacekeeping operation. Karlsrud, J and Rosén, F 2013. In the Eye of the Beholder? UN and the Use of Drones to Protect Civilians. Stability: Inter- national Journal of Security and Development 2(2):27, DOI: http://dx.doi. org/10.5334/sta.boPg. 15/20: protection of civilians, assessment of refugee and IDP movements, and evaluation of environmental challeng- es, including natural disasters. The DRC government approved the UAVs, in the absence of formal regulation or even any air traffic control sys- tems. The devices are unarmed, can fly up to 12 hours with a range of 150 miles, and are deployed in North Kivu at night. They are equipped with day/night cameras with electro-optical and infrared thermal technology, which can see through the region’s forest canopy, heavy cloud and fog.45 All data, imagery, and derived analysis products are and will remain the property of the UN. While it is too early to see the operational impact, the deployment raises important questions. How useful will the data be? Is there the necessary analytical capacity? Will the UAV create unrealistic expectations for rapid humanitarian reaction? Will the project blur the distinc- tion between humanitarian efforts and military actions, undermining access to populations in need in areas con- trolled by armed groups?Pg. 15/20: 45 Einhorn, Rebecca. “The UN’s Use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles in the Dem- ocratic Republic of the Congo: U.S. Support and Potential Foreign Policy Advantages.” Better World Campaign (n.d.): n. pag. May 2013. Web.Pg. 16/20: The future of the humanitarian use of UAVs remains unclear. The regulatory issues in particular are a major hurdle, and are likely to result in a patchwork of countries where the vehicles can be used. Nonetheless, the trends seem clear: more sophisticated, affordable vehicles; more civilian use and growing acceptance; and more regular use in civil pro- tection and disaster response. The pressure for humanitari- ans to adopt this technology, or to provide principled justifi- cations for why they do not, will only increase. On the technical side, humanitarian organizations seem likely to continue to rely on small, portable UAVs, primarily for di- saster response. Despite the limited range and flight time of these units, they are likely to have the fewest legal concerns, and may encourage humanitarians to engage with the com- munities they are surveying rather than working remotely. Until UAVs are much more established in general civilian use, the risks of humanitarians using UAVs particularly in conflict settings are greater than the benefits. The focus therefore should be developing best practices and guide- lines for their use in natural disasters, slow-onset emergen- cies and early recovery. Humanitarian organizations will need to develop guidance on whether and how they use UAVs belonging to peacekeeping missions and military and intelligence actors, as well as human rights organizations. At a country-level, a common humanitarian position on the use of UAVs, where possible, agreed through the Humani- tarian Country Team (HCT), will help to ensure consistent messaging and practices.Pg. 16/20: In order to better understand the potential for using UAVs in humanitarian response, below are several suggested areas to further develop policy and practice: 1. Focus on using UAVs in natural disasters and avoid use in conflict settings: The use of UAVs in conflict settings is still too complex and hard to separate from military uses. 2. Develop a supportive legal and regulatory frame- work: More work needs to be done to develop standard procedures, guidelines and certification programs to ensure that humanitarian use for UAVs is recognized as an established practice. Humanitarians may also need to advocate for national regulatory agencies to recognize humanitarian uses of UAVs or to provide exemptions in an emergency. 3. Prioritize transparency and community engage- ment: Concerns about privacy are a major obstacle to deploying UAVs. There is a need to develop best practices for transparency and community engagement in UAV program design, including codes of conduct and data security guidelines. 4. Ensure principled partnerships: Humanitarian orga- nizations should also ensure that partnerships and com- mercial agreements with private sector companies are in line with humanitarian principles, and that companies other interests, particularly military work, do not affect humanitarian neutrality."	Damage & Need Assessment	Imagery (UAV/Satellite)	Supply	UAV																																											WDR 2013 complete-focus on technology and the future of humanitarian action.pdf	"Pg. /284: Increasingly, partnerships are being formed by relief organizations and local Ken-yan telecoms to distribute aid more efficiently. The World Food Programme (WFP) is currently partnering with M-PESA to make sure drought-affected populations in northern Kenya are getting the food they need (WFP, 2012). Around 16,000 participat-ing families were given a mobile phone, a SIM card and set up with M-PESA accounts as part of a three-month pilot programme. They receive about 3,000 Kenyan shil-lings a month (about US$ 35) to buy groceries at local markets. Sara Belfrage, WFP programme officer, says there was some concern that handing over money, instead of food, might backfire. “Of course you can never be sure, but if you target right and reach food insecure people, their first need is to buy food. Women make up an 80 per cent majority of the beneficiaries. We also monitor the projects and those reports show that they are spending the majority of the money on the food” (Belfrage, per-sonal communication, 2013).Pg. /: From a user perspective, digital discussion tables are used for accessing and sharing the information at the headquarters level. This tool also has the capability to perform multipoint remote conferencing with video and personal computer (PC) screen capture.The key component of the system, however, was to find a usable and scalable way to identify individ- uals and their records uniquely. For this purpose, Felica cards were used for personal identification. Felica cards are used, for example, as public transport fare tickets in Japan, and include a physical identity (ID) number. Most cellular phones in Japan also have a Felica card function, making them widespread and easily available. So if a displaced person had some sort of Felica card, it could be used for personal identification by their physical ID number. If they are not in possession of a Felica card, this could easily be provided using a readily available disposable Felica card which they can then attach to any personal belongings.Other sources of information included a network of web cameras with remote control functions, used to remotely monitor disaster-affected areas. These cameras can send images automatically, triggered by motion detection or at set intervals.The National Institute of Public Health first used this system in June and October 2012 during its regular three-day health crisis management training course. Each group simulated entering data on displaced people using this system. There were many technical issues in the first course, such as with the ease of entry to the software or network trouble. These were solved in the second course, however, and many suggestions were made to improve the system, including on the data elements and simulation settings. An advanced course was held in January 2013, mainly devoted to the plan- ning of disaster management. The GIS was used along with a paper map to summarize and integrate information coming from the field.Based on this experience, the National Institute of Public Health is now developing a standard curriculum for disaster management, and the information management system will be incorporated into the content of training courses. CRM can be accessed by mobile phone and/or smartphone and this interface is now being developed. However, it is possible that acute phase information will be entered by other means, such as by satellite phone. Also, health support staff may need to continue to record the results of inter- views on paper and enter them in the system later at the office. A summary of the data will be displayed on the GIS, so that it will be much easier to understand the overview of the disaster.The Disaster Medical Assistance Team will work during the most acute phase of emergency response, and they use an Emergency Medical Information System (EMIS) for data sharing. Discussions are ongo- ing about how to integrate the EMIS with the health management system. Mental health support teams also work at evacuation centres and use a Disaster Mental Information System to report on their support activities. The National Institute of Public Health is currently negotiating to share data mutually. Broader coordination and harmonization are also needed with other institutions, such as local governments and the Ministry of Internal Affairs.Pg. /: Humanitarian (early) adoptersPerhaps one of the most important developments with respect to humanitarian innovation in information management among formal humanitarian organization is the American Red Cross’s Digital Operations Center, launched in partnership with Dell on 7 March 2012 (Meier, 2012c). This is the first social media centre devoted exclusively to humanitarian and disaster relief efforts. More than 4,000 tweets ref- erence the Red Cross on an average day, a figure that can easily increase tenfold at a moment’s notice when disaster strikes. So the centre uses Radian6, proprietary software to monitor and analyse social media in real time. Radian6’s ‘engagement console’ is a web-based tool that enables the American Red Cross to customize spe- cific search queries to collect timely, relevant information and to respond accordingly to users posting the informative content. For example, the Red Cross team can reply to a specific tweet, Facebook status update or blog post directly from the console. The engagement console also includes real-time ‘sentiment analysis’ that helps to gauge the overall ‘emotional state’ or mood of eyewitnesses and disaster-affected popula- tions. These and other metrics are displayed using customized timelines, charts and world graphics to visualize relevant social media trends over time. Sentiment analy- sis was also used in response to the Haiti earthquake by analysing the general mood reflected in the SMS sent by the disaster-affected population. This type of analysis provides an important feedback loop vis-à-vis the general reaction of the affected population – be it a reaction to a disaster or a humanitarian intervention.The Radian6 platform allows for up to 25 users from the American Red Cross, a number of staff that the organization cannot commit. It therefore turned to digital volunteers, inspired by the proof of concept demonstrated by the SBTF, which had already been in operation for 18 months when the Digital Operations Center went live. It launched a Disaster Digital Volunteer Training Program to train volunteers on how to use the Radian6 platform for digital disaster response and how the tech- nology fits within the organization’s overall workflow for humanitarian action. Once certified, volunteers act as an official online Red Cross representative. To date, the training programme has certified more than 50 digital volunteers who operate at the forefront of the American Red Cross’s social media response during disasters.The use of Radian6 does poses a number of challenges for humanitarian organiza- tions. The software licence is particularly expensive and the platform itself was not developed with humanitarian applications in mind. In addition, the humanitarian sector does not represent a financially interesting market for software companies like Salesforce. So these companies rarely invest in maintaining or upgrading the software for disaster response purposes. This explains why free and/or open-source software is an important cornerstone of next generation humanitarian technologies.84 Focus on technology and the future of humanitarian actionWorld Disasters Report 2013 Strengthening humanitarian information: the role of technologyBOX 3.3 Increasing effectiveness through information management and visualizationThe American Red Cross recognizes the expanding potential for new technologies and their application to benefit humanitarian work. It has been investing in technology that improves information management, processing and visualization, to support coordination and decision-making in disaster management.Through the visual display of information, mapping and GIS are creating new avenues for improvedinformation management and analysis for the American Red Cross, both domestically and internationally.Domestically, the American Red Cross has been using mapping and GIS technology to support its operations since the early 1990s. GIS has enabled staff to visualize key spatial trends within communi- ties, like socio-economic dynamics or areas most affected by frequent flooding, providing information that can be shared with relevant author- ities to facilitate cooperation around contingency planning and/or pro- posed mitigation projects. Through long-standing relationships with gov-The American Red Cross has been using mobile data collection domestically in medium-scale disasters since 2007. Equipping and training field staff and volunteers to use GPS-enabled devices with pre-loaded damage assessment survey questions has enabled the production of digital maps that display survey results and photos of damaged areas. These maps can be updated in real time as assessments are ongoing. © American Red Crossernment agencies and other partners, the American Red Cross has been able to share maps and the data behind them to support analysis and decision-making at management and service delivery levels. Through a web-based platform, interactive maps created at headquarters are shared with local chapters who can then download them, turn layers of data on or off and add additional data to tailor maps to their own needs.For example, in the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy in October 2012, the American Red Cross used maps to summarize damage assessment survey results from more than 90,000 respondents to help both the Red Cross and government service providers coordinate and target service delivery, such as where to position feeding and assistance vehicles. By overlaying demographic data on these maps, information was provided to decision-makers on the level of resources available within communities to cope with disaster damages. Similarly in 2011, after Hurricane Irene, during which more than 4 million people lost power, the American Red Cross directed its mobile feeding units to areas without electricity based on maps it generated with data from power companies on power access and outages.In 2012, the American Red Cross tested the power of GIS internationally during the IFRC’s cholera epidemic response in Sierra Leone. Working with the IFRC and the Sierra Leone Red Cross Society, American Red Cross mapping staff used primary and secondary data organized by province to create maps illustrating the geographic overlap between trained Sierra Leone Red Cross health volunteers and cholera case rates. These maps helped to direct resource allocation within the response and improve cooperation between the IFRC, the Sierra Leone Red Cross and the Ministry of Health.Pg. /: Maps can be a powerful tool to help coordinate disaster response activities and visualize relationships between hazards, vulnerabilities and existing resources within communities. This map illustrates the geographic overlap between Red Cross volunteer health workers and cholera cases during an outbreak in Sierra Leone in August 2012. © American Red CrossThe American Red Cross is also piloting the use of GIS to improve long-term international program- ming. Basic maps, such as dirt or stick maps, are a core com- ponent of the vulnerability and capacity assessment process used by Red Cross Red Cres- cent societies globally and are excellent tools to help commu- nities organize information anddiscuss their vulnerabilities, but are not easily preserved or communicated outwardly. The American Red Cross is working with the Uganda Red Cross Society to geo-reference household data from baseline and monitoring surveys to create digital maps that inform project design and implementa- tion. In Gulu, Uganda’s second largest city, volunteers have helped the Uganda Red Cross select communities most at risk of fires by digitally mapping the location of huts. In eastern Uganda, open- source data about community assets (churches, schools and evacuation routes) are overlaid onto sophisticated flood models provided by other agencies to create maps that will help communities and Red Cross staff identify assets that are most at risk of flooding. This analysis has the potential to inform early warning systems, helping more precisely identify infrastructure that could be damaged or disabled during floods.Whereas traditional geospatial analysis performed by national disaster management agencies or research institutions focuses on the large or medium scale, local actors with GIS capacity and training, including Red Cross branches or chapters, can bridge the information gap at the local level. By illustrating the concentration of grass-thatched huts in Gulu, Uganda, this map helped identify communities most at risk of fires. © American Red CrossEmbracing digital map- ping also creates unique opportunities to ‘crowd- source’ tedious but important mapping tasks through OpenStreetMap (OSM), the openly editable ‘Wikipedia of maps’. The American Red Cross has worked with Red Cross staff and volunteers in Chile, Colombia, Indone- sia and Uganda to engage volunteers in these map-ping projects. The volunteers trace roads, buildings and landmarks into OSM while local Red Cross staff and volunteers map significant community infrastructure, hazards and resources. These exer- cises increase National Societies’ mapping and GIS capacity and produce high-quality base maps and data that are freely accessible to all through OSM’s web interface.The American Red Cross is also working with the IFRC’s Pan-American Disaster Response Unit to develop an advanced system for registering and serving people affected by disasters. The system encompasses a range of database tools, which will help disaster response teams quickly registerStrengthening humanitarian information: the role of technologyindividuals and record the distribution of emergency relief supplies using laptops, tablets, mobile phonesand barcode scanners.Historically, disaster response operations have relied on basic spreadsheets to track the flow of people and supplies in a crisis. While passable, it is extremely difficult to use this approach for processes such as registering large groups, tracking repeat assistance over time, generating real-time reports and verifying identity and eligibility. Recently, the Red Cross Red Crescent developed and promoted Mega V, a light- weight database application for ticket scanning and registration of affected people. The new joint system will expand on this initial work. Using barcoded cards and tickets, the system will help quickly deliver assistance to the right people while allowing teams to coordinate their efforts and better plan operations.By electronically collecting and managing data, the system will also facilitate better communication with recipients, making it possible to synchronize data across an entire operation, send alerts and updates via text messages and integrate with other mobile services, including social media. Ultimately, this means a more streamlined and efficient relief process, which translates to shorter waits, less duplication, improved service and ‘distribution with dignity’ for those affected by disaster. The initial version should be launched in mid-2013.The system is being developed using open-source and licence-free technologies that allow easy transi- tion and adoption by Red Cross Red Crescent National Societies, allowing for local ownership of all data concerning recipients, an important consideration for privacy and long-term sustainability. The system will include parallel paper-based processes for use when technology is inoperable or impractical.The American Red Cross continues to invest in, explore and develop new technologies because of the benefits initial investments have yielded in terms of improvements in planning, targeting, implementing and coordinating operations. While the transition to new information management systems can be chal- lenging, increases in efficiency and effectiveness have demonstrated that overcoming these barriers is well worth the effort.Pg. /: BOX 3.4 Data sharing and exchange in GermanyOver the past decades, challenges in disaster management have changed in Europe. Due to its high population density and strong dependency on technological infrastructure, Germany is exposed to new threats. Robust and self-sufficient solutions are needed. The federal government there- fore launched a national programme, ‘Research for Civil Security’. During the period from 2007 to 2012, the Federal Ministry of Education and Research invested 123 million euros in interdisciplinary projects. After a successful evaluation process of the first programme, the government decided to launch the second period (2012-2017) with an even bigger budget. The aim is to develop new tech- nologies in order to provide more security without encroaching civil rights. The programme involves88 Focus on technology and the future of humanitarian actionWorld Disasters Report 2013 Strengthening humanitarian information: the role of technologyapplication-oriented work within the projects, by incorporating the entire innovation chain – from research to industry and most importantly to end users, such as governmental authorities, fire brigades, hospitals, the police and relief and humanitarian organizations. Research is organized with a focus on demand-ori- ented concepts, along with actual practice in order to fulfil its overall aim: to improve the protection of people and provide the means to rescue them if necessary.The German Red Cross was invited to participate in the programme and decided to apply for its pilot project, SPIDER (Security Systems for Public Institutions in Disastrous Emergency Scenarios), which was funded from 2009 to 2012 as part of the national research initiative, Scenario-based Civil Security Research. The objective of research was data exchange in terms of improved communication.In Germany, civil protection is organized on a federal and inter-organizational basis, so collaboration among the different stakeholders is crucial. This is especially the case in mass casualty incidents, where a huge amount of information must be managed and data sharing is key for optimized disaster manage- ment. This is, however, not only a technical challenge. Protecting data, especially personal data, must be treated cautiously, respecting the independence of partners and realizing that the end does not justify the means. Technology – or new concepts of data sharing possibilities – will only be considered as a change for the better, if the humanitarian mission and its execution are not impaired. And technological solutions will survive and prosper only if there is a direct impact in practice. The mutual dependency creates a good environment for cooperative work.The German Red Cross, as leader of the project, decided to address the issue holistically and brought together a consortium of 11 institutions involved in the data sharing discussion such as the fire brigade, clinics, state police, industrial partners and universities. Within the consortium, the Red Cross worked closely with the technical coordinator, the Communication Networks Institute (CNI) of Dortmund’s Uni- versity of Technology. One of the CNI’s main research topics focuses on the development of innovative communication solutions.Past disasters and crises have shown the necessity of research in supporting information and commu- nication technology. Organizations have developed a variety of diverse and mutually incompatible crisis information systems, which make it difficult to work cohesively. To address this problem, SPIDER aimed at providing a ‘system of systems’, which should guarantee a better interoperability for information shar- ing between public institutions. Most important in this process is that legacy systems can coexist, for both financial and usability reasons. Civil protection in Germany is assumed by volunteers, who undergo various training courses, including in German Red Cross technical systems, to prepare them for their mission. Maintaining well-known systems for the future, therefore, ensures a broader user acceptance.Information should be exchanged in a transparent manner across system boundaries in order to create synergies in the disposition of resources while time-critical processes are accelerated. Within the SPI-DER project, the information exchange was achieved by a common XML-based message format, called Protection and Rescue Markup Language (PRML). The PRML is ‘human readable’ and, therefore, easy to integrate in existing disaster relief management software. One sample application for PRML-based intercommunication is the search for missing people, where the databases of, for example, the German Red Cross, fire brigades and clinics, are brought together via PRML and searched simultaneously.Another SPIDER project research topic was the deployment of a communications network at the sceneof an incident. The analysis of recent crises has led to the conclusion that infrastructure networks, like theWorld Disasters Report 2013 Chapter 3 Strengthening humanitarian information: the role of technologypublic mobile phone network, cannot be used during a crisis, because of panic calls or damaged infrastructure. Therefore, rescue personnel need to be able to deploy their own ad hoc incident network. In SPIDER, this network is based on ‘dropped units’, which are battery-powered WiFi routers. Dropped units build an automatically configured mesh network. To place these units, spe- cial process-integrated placement procedures were investigated and, as a result, they have been integrated into rescue personnel’s standard equipment – a case of technology following tactics. The mesh network established by the dropped units enables new IP (internet protocol)-based services, such as video stream transmission from helmet cameras of first responders to the officer in charge. Another service is an interactive situation map, which shows the current position of first responders, if GPS signals can be received. The officer in charge can therefore dispatch rescue personnel and respond quickly to changes during a crisis.In conclusion, SPIDER enables the federation of diverse disaster relief management using PRML. It builds a system of systems, which forms a rich database for various new services, supporting rescue personnel in the field and decision-makers. SPIDER also provides new approaches for networking first responders at incident scenes. Dropped units can be integrated into the work process and therefore deploy a communications network, without hindering the first responders from carrying out their main tasks.Pg. /: BOX 3.5 Human mobility analysis through big dataWhereas a specialized public continues to debate whether big data is or isn’t “the answer to solving the world’s most intractable problems” (Crawford, 2013), little has been done to base these discus- sions on firm conceptual, empirical and methodological grounds. The state of affairs is changing fast, as is everything with big data. One area where welcome developments have occurred and92 Focus on technology and the future of humanitarian actionWorld Disasters Report 2013 Strengthening humanitarian information: the role of technologypromising avenues are emerging is human mobility analysis – population movements and migratory pat-terns – through the lens of big data.First, it is useful to clarify what big data refers to in these contexts and what underpins the excitement it has stirred. As ‘data’ used for public policy and (especially) social science research purposes, ‘big data’ – in lower case – can be defined as “the traces of human actions picked up by digital devices, or as the digital translation (understood in its literal sense) of human actions” (Letouzé, Meier and Vinck, 2013). Others have distinguished what they refer to as “digital breadcrumbs” – structured data such as mobile phone records or credit card transactions – from social media data (Pentland, 2012). Whatever the definition, the point is that these non-sampled data repositories and streams (Horrigan, 2013) are produced by individuals as by-products of their daily activities and thereby hold the potential to tell life stories and show details of social interaction beyond aggregates at high levels of temporal and spatial granularities (Pentland, 2012). So the ‘revolutionary’ dimension (Mayer-Schönberger and Cukier, 2013) of big data is not the volume of these streams nor even their velocity or variety (the famous ‘3 Vs’ ini- tially used to describe big data). Rather, the true novelty comes from their specific qualitative nature as passively generated digital behavioural data – with the 3 Vs or 4 Vs (the fourth V standing for value or variability) being correlates of this fundamental feature. As importantly, “Big Data is not about the data” (King, 2013); rather, ‘Big Data’ (as a field, denoted with capital letters) is about the analytics and being able to extract insights on “how individual people, groups, and societies think and behave” (King, 2013). Of course, advanced statistical, data mining and/or machine-learning techniques are part of the toolkit. But the relevance of any analysis relying on big data ultimately depends on its contextual, ethnographic grounding (Burrell, 2012; Lorentz, 2013).How does that all play out when attempting to leverage big data to study human mobility? International migration rates and patterns have recently been studied using Yahoo! e-mail data (Zagheni and Weber, 2012) and web log-ins IP geo-location (State, Weber and Zagheni, 2013). But in low- and middle-in- come countries, mobile phone data – known as Call Detail Records or CDRs – are an attractive source of information on human mobility. A growing academic literature has shown the potential of CDR anal- ysis to infer internal migration patterns, study spatial dynamics in urban slums, model malaria spread, unveil patterns of reciprocity giving after a disaster, etc. Recent CDRs made available by Orange in Côte d’Ivoire were analysed by IBM researchers to develop a new model for optimizing bus routes (Talbot, 2013a). The commonality of these studies is to rely on and take advantage of “how mobile carriers see the world” (UN Global Pulse, 2012) through the information contained in CDRs, including caller ID, loca- tion through triangulation of cell towers, receiver ID and location, time and duration of call. Thus, with CDRs it becomes possible to ‘follow’ and map the journey and interactions of an individual – or, rather, of a phone or SIM card – to look for patterns and trends in the data, especially in conjunction with other datasets, and attempt to model and understand dynamic behaviours. For example, it could help address questions such as: how do population movements change in response to rising food prices, weather shocks, disaster events or large-scale violence? And what does it mean in turn for public policy, human- itarian assistance, etc.?Importantly, both a consequence and a driver of this growing body of knowledge, the field of data anal- ysis from mobile networks is quickly going through a ‘formalization’ phase. First, specific measures and variables have been developed or adapted to characterize and quantify individual and collective mobility(Nurmi, 2012), to detect, for example, important places, the area of influence or the ‘radius of gyra- tion’ (a measure of average daily distance covered by an individual). Second, this promising strand of research is being discussed in a growing number of dedicated forums, such as NetMob confer- ences, and the volume of academic papers using CDRs will almost certainly increase markedly in future months.As these examples and common sense suggest, using CDRs for mobility analysis raises signifi- cant challenges and risks that are not left unaddressed. One is, of course, gaining access to the data. Even when the data are stored in ways that would allow relatively easy transfers, telecom companies are reluctant to share CDRs owing to privacy and reputational considerations. One important avenue here is to devise privacy-preserving mobile phone data sharing and analysis protocols (Talbot, 2013b) as part of the broader ‘data philanthropy’ movement (Kirkpatrick, 2011; Meier, 2012d). Further, an obvious analytical challenge is the non-representativeness of the data that hinders external validity; in other words the fact that “making population-level inferences using these data is complicated by differential ownership of phones among different demographic groups that may exhibit variable mobility” (Buckee et al., 2013). A complementary argument that highlights the ethnographic requirement of ‘sound’ big data analysis results from the tendency of many people in low- and middle-income countries to share or exchange phones and SIM cards, which complicates the task of making inferences as to individuals’ movements. But research and progress are also happening in response: for example, Buckee et al. (2013) attempted to mea- sure the impact of biases in mobile phone ownership on estimates of human mobility (and found these estimates to be surprisingly robust). Correction methodologies for biases in e-mail data have also been proposed (Zagheni and Weber, 2012), although validation is difficult for lack of reliable ‘ground-truthing’ data.CDR analysis in particular does appear to offer great promise to better understand and quan- tify human mobility in low- and middle-income countries, including in disaster and crisis settings, although much more work is needed to develop robust methodologies and institutional partnerships that will help overcome the challenges, risks, obstacles and gaps alluded to above. But these diffi- culties should not obscure the fact that the combination of exponential growth rates of mobile phone penetration and data production in low- and middle-income countries and intense interest and efforts from social scientists and policy-makers will, in all likelihood, make human mobility based on CDR analysis standard practice by the end of the decade.Pg. /: A year after the Haiti crisis, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) formally activated the SBTF on 1 March 2011 (SBTF blog, 2011a). The SBTF was requested to create a live crisis map of Libya sourced from relevant social media content, such as Twitter, Facebook, Flickr and You-Tube. OCHA provided a full list of indicators such as movements of people, health, logistics and security/threat. More than 150 digital volunteers maintained a live map over a four-week activation period, collecting, geo-referencing, analysing and verifying large volumes of crisis information related to these specific categories. The live – but private and password-protected – map was launched within hours of the request. A public map was later made available, but without personal iden- tifying information and with a 24-hour time delay for security reasons.The chief of OCHA’s Information Services Section commended the SBTF for giving OCHA “an output that is manageable and digestible, which in turn contributes to better situational awareness and decision-making” (SBTF blog, 2011a). OCHA’s liaison officer with the SBTF also noted that, “OCHA did not have the idle capacity to gather, verify and process the enormous amount of available online informa- tion” (SBTF blog, 2011b).Many traditional humanitarian organizations are unaware that social media content can often be verified. The BBC’s User-Generated Content Hub (UGC), for example, has been verifying user-generated content shared on social media forAt OCHA’s request, some 150 digital volunteers created the Libya Crisis Map with data sourced from social media networks. They maintained the live map (no longer available) for four weeks, collecting and verifying large volumes of information on categories such as population movements, health and logistics. more than eight years – it was set up in 2005, a full year before Twitter was born. The UGC’s expertise in verification directly informed the SBTF’s verification prac- tices. Moreover, as OCHA has recently acknowledged: “The evidence suggests that new information sources are no less representative or reliable than more traditional sources, which are also imperfect in cri... (Remaining results omitted due to excel limitation. See online charts.)"	Online Cash	Mobile	Identity Management	Felica cards	Damage & Need Assessment	Web Cameras	Education/Awareness	Interactive Learning	Damage & Need Assessment	Social Media	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics	Privacy 	Information Seciruty																																	WEB Humanitarianism in the Network Age vF single.pdf	"Pg. 15/120: Filipinos are part of a global trend: the emergence of a network age, where increased access to information and communications technologies has encouraged more decentralized decision- making and is helping to reshape social, political and economic activity.Pg. 32/120: Widespread access to Global Positioning System information through mobile phones, coupled with the increased availability of satellite imagery, allows for unprecedented geographic precision to be added to raw data. This offers significant opportunities for crisis responders. Geographical Information Systems (GIS), which combine hardware and software used for the storage, retrieval, mapping and analysis of geographic data, have long been an essential component of effective crisis response.41 But today, technology once limited to experts and institutions is available to anyone. This has allowed groups of self-organizing volunteers to place SMS messages and social media postings on dynamic maps, highlighting clusters of cries for help in an earthquake, or identifying where roads have been washed away after a flood.41 See http://egsc.usgs.gov/isb/pubs/gis_poster/ or http:// www.esri.com/what-is-gis/overview.html or http://www. nwgis.com/gisdefn.htm – which offer variants of the same definition.Pg. 35/120: The questions now are how and when to leverage the comparative advantage of crowdsourced approaches? If automation can produce 64 per cent accuracy, then perhaps the best use of scarce resources would be to target those issues or areas that cannot be automated—in bringing the accuracy from 64 to 85 per cent rather than doing the entire process. Identifying the best uses of crowdsourcing and how to blend automated and crowdsourced approaches is a critical area for study.5656 USAID. Crowdsourcing to Geocode Development Credit Authority Data: A Case Study. Available from http://transition.usaid.gov/our_work/economic_ growth_and_trade/development_credit/pdfs/2012/ USAIDCrowdsourcingCaseStudy.pdf.Pg. 36/120: Mobile money, i.e. the use of cell phones as digital wallets, has advanced faster in developing countries than in the OECD. Three quarters of the countries that use mobile money most frequently are in Africa.62 Kenya has almost 20 million mobile-money users. They conducted 1.2 trillion Kenyan Shillings ($14.2 billion) of mobile transactions in 2011.63 Diaspora communities and remittances are helping to boost the importance of mobile money, particularly where their financial and banking systems have limited reach.64 For example, in Somalia, 34 per cent of adults use mobile money, often to receive remittances from family members overseas.65 Mobile money has significant implications for humanitarian assistance. It offers a simple and secure method of transferring funds to people in need and a potentially rich source of information about how that money flows. In 2008, Concern Worldwide worked with Safaricom’s M-PESA system to transfer cash to people affected by post-electoral violence in remote areas of Kenya. Since then, mobile-money transfers have been used in diverse situations, from reaching famine-affected communities in Somalia to supporting housing reconstruction in Haiti.66 The Cash Learning Partnership, a group of five global NGOs and IFRC, supported by VISA and ECHO, has highlighted how electronic payment-and-registration systems can improve aid accountability by providing a clear data trail from funding to recipients.67Mobile money and the data exhaust from modern banking technology have the potential for use in crisis prevention. UN Global Pulse has hypothesized that tracking aggregate trends in savings, defaults on microloans and other types of electronic payments could produce useful early warning indicators of income reductions.68In many ways, mobile money highlights the opportunities and challenges of using network-age technologies. The potential is for faster, more accountable delivery of aid and the ability to better prevent crises. At the same time, the limited, albeit increasing, amount of quantitative evidence and the lack of baseline data make it difficult to identify how mobile money can deliver all that it promises. The Cash Learning Partnership is trying to address this knowledge deficit and offers a potentially powerful model for other efforts to learn from innovation.6962 The Economist. Press 1 for modernity. Available fromhttp://www.economist.com/node/21553510 .63 Telecompaper. Kenya mobile money transfers hit KES 1.2 trillion in 2011. Available from http://www. telecompaper.com/news/kenya-mobile-money- transfers-hit-kes-12-trillion-in-2011--858478.64 UN Global Pulse. Big Data for Development. Available from http://www.unglobalpulse.org/sites/default/files/ BigDataforDevelopment-UNGlobalPulseJune2012.pdf.65 The Economist. The bank of SMS. Available from http:// www.economist.com/blogs/graphicdetail/2012/04/ daily-chart-12.66 ALNAP INNOVATIONS. “Cash Transfers through Mobile Phones: An Innovative Emergency Response in Kenya.” August 2009.67 CALP. New Technologies in Cash Transfer Programming and Humanitarian Assistance. Available from http:// www.cashlearning.org/downloads/resources/calp/ CaLP_New_Technologies.pdf.68 UN Global Pulse. Big Data for Development. Available from http://www.unglobalpulse.org/sites/default/files/ BigDataforDevelopment-UNGlobalPulseJune2012.pdf.69 See http://www.cashlearning.org/.Pg. 17/120: As the information on the next two pages shows, the adoption, use and choice of technology depend on many factors. They include affordability, availability, literacy, gender, age, status, physical abilities, cultural preferences, political environment, and the media/IT/telecoms network and infrastructure. But as costs fall and coverage increases, all indicators suggest that usage will continue to increase rapidly in rural areas and among poorer people."	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics	Damage & Need Assessment	Crowdsourcing 	Online Cash	Mobile																																									1 Redhum-LAC-Doc-Executive_Report-National_Consultation-Jamaica-WHS-201504-20150430-DS-16369.pdf	"Pg. 6/6: Red Cross whereby an ATM card is issued instead of food packages. • VHS Radios being used in Special Need communities can be expanded to all of JamaicaPg. 5/6: TRANSFORMATION THROUGH INNOVATION • Protection of state resources/national treasures during disasters. • Incorporate appropriate lessons in school curricula, for example, the use of tablets distributed to school children enabled with disaster related applications. • Whilst the exercise is supporting the humanitarian Summit we are mindful that some of the recommendations should be discussed further for implementation in the local environment and inclusion of an Implementation and Communication Plan. • Creation of more applications like the Red Cross application to support access on mobile phones • Recommendation for a central database to store various assets within the various communities that is accessible by the decision makers. • Cultural sensitivity with regard to publishing. • Development of policies/standards/guidelines to govern the use of social media. • Review Disaster Act to ensure provision for involvement of private sector to facilitate use of messaging/communication tools eg. Mobile phones. • Reference to special needs and vulnerable groups in review of Disaster Act. • Incorporate redundancies in business continuity"	Communication	Radio	Education/Awareness	Interactive Learning	Communication	Mobile														x																	x										1 WHS Pacific Stakeholder analysis.pdf	"Pg. 18/43: and capacity assessments should be optimized. This should include mobile phone based soft- ware, as used recently by some organizations and clusters in Vanuatu, and other innovations. CSO consultations in Australia discussed the op- portunities for mobile technologies to enhance needs assessment and accountability, increas- ing effectiveness and further putting people at the centre of response."	Damage & Need Assessment	Mobile																		x																		x									1 WHS Regional Consultation for West and Central Africa - Co-Chairs' Summary Report.pdf	"Pg. 4/4: • Humanitarian organizations to further investigate the use of innovative methods for gaining access to affected populations (examples: gaining feedback by SMS, use of non-military drones, cash transfers)."	Communication	Mobile	Online Cash	Mobile	Damage & Need Assessment	Imagery (UAV/Satellite)															x												x														WHS NESA Regional Consultation Co-Chairs Summary.pdf	"Pg. 3/4: • Innovation needs to focus on preparedness and DRR as well as immediate response. • End-to-end and disaster resilient communication systems should be strengthened to better document and share information. Innovation in this area of work is already splintered and needs better joining up; there is not necessarily a need for “new”, rather a need for “more coherent” approaches."	Damage & Need Assessment	Mobile																			x													x													2 ESA Regional Consultation - Final Report.pdf	"Pg. 77/91: Information, Communication and Technology: A large number of stakeholders, 38 per cent of respondents to the regional stakeholder survey and 43 per cent of respondents to the private sector survey, agreed that there should be greater and wider use of information and communication technologies, such as mobile phones, internet, and social media in disseminating or improving humanitarian action, especially in communicating with communities. Data and information management were seen as key contributors to effective humanitarian action, for example by collecting and sharing needs assessments and conducting local capacity mappings. Stakeholders noted how in Madagascar a community-level text message system supported by national telecom operators provided both early warning and post-disaster rapid data collection within 48 hours. Better information co ection was demanded, for examp e, on civi society organizations ro es and capacities, with a suggestion from Eastern Africa to compi e a Ye ow Pages of NGOs"".Pg. 78/91: Use of traditiona communication p atforms: A though stakeho ders from within the humanitarian community recognized the potentia va ue of using new techno ogies to communicate, the arge majority, of participants to the community consu tations for Southern Africa identified more traditiona methods as better forms of communicating with disaster- and conifict-affected communities. These inc uded face- to-face communication, radio and te evision programmes in oca anguages, and the dissemination of information at community centres, such as city ha s and p aces of worship. Stakeho ders in Zimbabwe mentioned vi age criers"" as a method used in Eastern and Southern Africa to communicate and share information in remote communities. As another traditiona information sharing system, Ethiopian stakeho ders mentioned the verba communication tradition referred to as Dagu, used by the Afar peop e. Stakeho ders suggested that traditiona communication systems shou d not be seen as a hindrance but an inspiration for improving know edge exchange. They further suggested that new communication techno ogies cou d be deve oped hand-in-hand with ora traditions.Pg. 90/91: The discussion pro- posed innovative ways to increase accountability and data analysis mechanisms; ranging from peer reviews and academic third party observers to meaningful live-systems that reap quality data on “failed” and successful projects. ThisPg. 77/91: Innovative approaches to pastoralism: Stakeholders in Eastern Africa called for innovative ways in which to best serve the needs of nomadic and pastoralist communities. They noted how the more sedentary forms of supporting humanitarian preparedness and providing relief did not fit societies on the move"", particularly those moving cross-border, and emphasized how pastoralists in the region changed locations out of survival. Mobile health clinics and mobile schools were given as examples of existing approaches that could be scaled up.Pg. 31/91: Adoption of new technologies: A new cross-cutting theme that emerged from discussions was the adoption of new technologies to a variety of contexts. Although the adoption of technology was most relevant within the innovation theme, it was also mentioned in each of the other three thematic areas. Participants recognized the potential of technology as a tool to converse with affected communities. They also recognized the possibilities of information and communications technologies in risk analysis and needs assessment, as well as cash transfers, particularly in conflict situations."	Communication	Mobile	Communication	Social Media	Communication	Radio																																									EOG Regional Consultation Meeting - Briefing Pack.pdf	"Pg. 26-27/92: Stakeholders recognized the positive role technology can play in humanitarian response. One NGO report highlighted particular information communication technologies (“ICTs”), such as mobile con- nectivity, data analytics and field support tools that may increase the effectiveness and efficiency of humanitarian responses. Participants in the youth surveys highlighted the role of social media and other networking technologies in raising awareness and delivering assistance. Other examples of use- ful technologies include unmanned aerial vehicles (“UAvs”), which can be used to monitor the need for specific goods or services. Non-ICTs, such as solar power and advance water filter tools, may also benefit vulnerable populations during and after crises."	Communication	Mobile	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics	Communication	Social Media	Supply	UAV	Alternative Energy	Solar Power																									x												WHS Regional Consultation NSEA Final Report - FULL (13 MB).pdf	"Pg. 9/96: Innovations in the area of information and communication were seen having the biggest potential to improve disaster response.Pg. 11/96: She also highlighted the role that media could play during times of disaster. In the Philippines, social media had been used to mobilize awareness and raise money for affected communities. She concluded by calling for more work to ensure that preparedness would become a way of life."	Communication	Mobile	Education/Awareness	Social Media																														x													WHS Regional Consultation West and Central Africa - Final Report.pdf	"Pg. 28/60: Where access is limited due to hostilities, refusal by one of the parties or purely logistical constraints, humanitarian should investigate and use innovative methods of gaining access or of compensating for limited access (such as gaining feedback by SMS or use of non-military drones)."	Communication	Mobile																															x														17 Redhum-LAC-Doc-Informe_Ejecutivo-Consulta_Nacional-Honduras-WHS-201504-20150430-DS-16365.pdf	"Pg. 2/11: Socializar y masificar las innovaciones tecnológicas existentes y las ya utilizadas (ODK,RMS, MEGA V).Pg. 6/11: • Existe la tecnología móvil a nivel nacional con la que se puede utilizar para compartir alertas e informar sobre incidentes."	Communication	Mobile																				x															x										OFADEC_EN_Report of the NNGO Consultation_FINAL.doc	"Pg. 2/4: Transformation through innovation We have seen that in Niger, for example, the use of phones to transfer cash to people, instead of traditional food distributions, has proven quite suitable and appreciated by people. At the same time it cannot forgotten that we have our own realities that can make this difficult: power outages or lack of electricity, illiteracy, lack of access to new technologies, poor telephone coverage, etc."	Online Cash	Mobile																				x											x														Participants Guide.pdf	"Pg. 7/34: The need for innovation was also discussed. Participants highlighted several examples of innovative solutions already in place: the Strategic Response Plan for the Sahel (2014-2016) as an example of multiyear initiatives; the programme ‘Cities and climate change’; ECOWAS humanitarian policy and ECOWARN; cash transfers; use of social media and mobile phones in communicating with communities; distribution of locally-produced enriched flour; and cooperation with private sector organizations (such as in response to the 2012 floods in Nigeria).Pg. 7/34: They also encouraged organizations to support and strengthen mechanisms for knowledge transfer and to share lessons learned across emergencies. Participants discussed various aspects of innovation, pointing out that it is not just about technology but about social changes and leveraging knowledge of the local culture and landscape on order to avoid ‘importing’ ideas which may not fit the real local needs. They referenced the example of using radio communication in displaced people’s native languages to increase understanding of the services available across borders (Niger and Nigeria one example, Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire another)."	Communication	Mobile	Communication	Social Media	Online Cash	Mobile																x											x														Preparatory Civil Society Organization Consultation.pdf	"Pg. 5/8: TRANSFORMATION THROUGH INNOVATION Innovative approaches in humanitarian action, especially on communication/IT technology, were shared from many participants. For example: • Smartphone were used for rapid assessment in Haiti by WV with UN agencies. • SNS called Kakaotalk was used by Korean network NGOs to share important guideline/standard and cluster information to member NGOs during typhoon Haiyan response in the Philippines. These NGOs also provided feedback to the company that operated Kakaotalk for further usability on this application. • One Foundation from China shared that virtual network connected to internet with maps where affected communities and CSOs can post need assessment data provides usual information for response planning. The system also works where SMS network is down, as long as internet connectivity is ensured. In addition to technology-based innovation, some participants mentioned that paradigm innovation was also important in the sector. For example, HFI from Indonesia is an inter-faith network and it facilitates multi-faith approach in emergency response. Their significant outreach and relationship with various affected communities allow them to see affected people as partners playing central role in the response. Additionally, it was noted again that local wisdom helps local communities to play essential role on recovering process. Although many good practices were shared, it was also noted that these innovative approaches usually emerge as ad hoc measures, and there is no systemic efforts to support the development or dissemination of these approaches. Therefore, the aspiration on this theme came out as mindset change within humanitarian community for full usage of existing tools / technology."	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics																				x			X									x													The power of business in the Ebola response [Event report].pdf	"Pg. 8/13: Mobile systems have a lot of potential for aiding the response: • Educational based messaging services • Financing solutions • Data tracking • Contact tracing • Triangulating positions of infections • Real time data surveillance and reportingPg. 8/13: GSMA had worked with WHO to organized a credible and locally relevant content messaging system and had coordinated with mobile operators across the region. A priority had been to counter misinformation, which had previously caused a lot of harm during the outbreak. One of the major barriers they had encountered was the large number of requests coming from multiple sources. Craig highlighted the need for a more coordinated contact and request system. The larger agencies needed to take a greater leadership role in finding the needs on the ground, securing endorsement from local communities and governments, and translating that into something that the private sector can respond to in a timely and measured fashion.Pg. 8/13: While mobile solutions can be activated very quickly, they had been experiencing large delays in securing agreements, commitments, and endorsements from governments to actually deploy those services. It was needed to overcome such barriers as mobile communication could play a very big role in the response, and in particular in preventing the spread of the outbreak to other countries."	Communication	Mobile	Education/Awareness	Mobile	Online Cash	Mobile																x																									WHS Theme 3 - Transformation through Innovation (regional - SE&NAsia).pdf	"Pg. 2/2: 5. Next steps As a starting point towards the development of a system-wide strategy the regional consultations should identify concrete areas where innovation may be able to assist in addressing constraints or gaps in humanitarian action, and where new and innovative approaches may support transformation in coordination or management of humanitarian access, preparedness and response. Such areas may include: • harnessing technology for better two-way (rather than broadcast) communications with people affected by disaster or crises; • mobile money and cash-transfer programming, combined with a revolutionized perspective on the role the private sector plays in disaster response and recovery, • using social media analytics and unmanned aerial vehicles for needs assessment work, • community-led risk mapping; • greater use of opportunities for crisis-insurance; • advanced water filters; • local production with 3-D printers;"	Communication	Mobile	Online Cash	Mobile	Damage & Need Assessment	Social Media	Damage & Need Assessment	Imagery (UAV/Satellite)	Water	Purifiers/Filters	Supply	3D Printers										x												x													1 WHS MENA Online Consultation Final Report.pdf	"Pg. 2/6: In terms of solutions to enable humanitarian workers to negotiate safe access to deliver aid to affected communities, and for those in conflict zones to safely receive assistance, some contributors suggested the use of drones for assessing needs and/or delivering humanitarian aid, while others highlighted the common practice of remote management from safer zones.Pg. 4/6: Significance of advancements in innovations: Innovation and advancements in technology as a means to alleviate the stresses of humanitarian assistance was emphasized. Among other things, innovations strengthen risk management capacities, support the establishment of Information Management frameworks and the integration of Disaster Preparedness and offer new modalities of assistance. Non-traditional partners should be better integrated in assistance frameworks to capitalize on their respective areas of experience."	Supply	UAV	Build Resilience	Risk Management																			x																								"Online Consultation Summary Report Preliminary Global Discussions, May-July 2014.pdf"	"Pg. 3/3: A summary of additional recommendations suggested by the discussion participants include:  2. Increase opportunities for digital (‘virtual’) volunteers, especially in disaster assessments and communications."	Damage & Need Assessment	Crowdsourcing																					x																								WHS Online Consultation Final Report - Europe and Others Group.pdf	"Pg. 25/30: Ankush Vengurleka, via Twitter, recommended better use of mobile and open platform technologies – both by humanitarian actors and affected communities – to allow better information sharing and enable early warning systems and coordination, even in remote areas."	Communication	Mobile																					x																								WHS Online Consultation Final Report - North and South-East Asia Discussions.pdf	"Pg. 1/3: 4. Further explore use of technologies such as Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs or ’drones’) for use in humanitarian contexts.Pg. 3/3: Theme 3: Transformation through Innovation A vibrant discussion over the use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs or ’drones’) took place. It was noted that there is existing research being conducted by UN OCHA on this issue as well as a Humanitarian UAV network that are developing Code of Conduct for the humanitarian use of UAVs. A suggestion was proposed for a regional innovation incubator, which could be housed within ASEAN. Additional recommendations included use of Google Glass or other technologies to amplify and facilitate data collection during humanitarian response."	Damage & Need Assessment	Imagery (UAV/Satellite)																					x											x													WHS Online Consultation for N & SE Asia - Weeks 1 & 2 Summary.pdf	"Pg. 2/4: Q. 3. Innovation is the new buzz-word. But what does it mean in the context of humanitarian action? Where can innovations help improve humanitarian action? The discussion on innovation started with Amjad from the UK asking whether drones should be utilized in humanitarian contexts. This question attracted some initial interesting comments in the first and second week. Sharon, as a discussion moderator, answered with a possible ‘future’ blue print of using drones in humanitarian contexts with careful considerations concerning matters such as regulations, privacy, ethics and technical capacities, etc. Patrick from Social Innovation, Switzerland, introduced the existence “UAVs are *already* being used in humanitarian settings. The World Food Program (WFP), for example, has had UAVs since 2007. Meanwhile, UNICEF, OCHA and others are also exploring the use of UAVs in a hands-on manner.” - Patrick, Social Innovation, Switzerland of the Humanitarian UAV Network (UAViators), which has a Code of Conduct for using Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) in humanitarian settings, and explained that UAVs are actually deployed to prepare for typhoons in a local area in the Philippines ‘now’, using a local empowerment, skills transfer and grassroots approach. Some valuable research papers and articles were posted by Sharon and Patrick. It is noteworthy that drones are developing in practice under hot debate and the days of drones in humanitarian settings seem to be coming, along with innovative ideas from humans. Meanwhile, Daniel from the USA pointed out that UNOCHA is working on a policy paper on the opportunities and challenges of UAVs in humanitarian response. He suggests more research is needed on the integration of aerial observation and data collection into needs and damage assessments, search and rescue and other humanitarian functions."	Damage & Need Assessment	Imagery (UAV/Satellite)																					x											x													WHS Online Consultation Report- North and South-East Asia Discussions-26 June 2014.docx	"Pg. 1/4: 4. Further explore use of technologies such as Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs or ’drones’) for use in humanitarian contexts.Pg. 3/4: Theme 3: Transformation through Innovation A vibrant discussion over the use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs or ’drones’) took place. It was noted that there is existing research being conducted by UN OCHA on this issue as well as a Humanitarian UAV network that are developing Code of Conduct for the humanitarian use of UAVs.Pg. 3/4: Additional recommendations included use of Google Glass or other technologies to amplify and facilitate data collection during humanitarian response."	Damage & Need Assessment	Imagery (UAV/Satellite)																					x											x													WHS Preliminary Online Global Consultation - Week 1 Summary.pdf	Pg. 3/4: Milagros from the USA asked for humanitarian actors to embrace innovative technology in order to better identify trends in conflict situations from people’s usage of SMS and web services.	Damage & Need Assessment	Data Analytics																					x																								WHS Preliminary Online Global Consultation - Week 3 Summary.pdf	"Pg. 2/4: Another new contributor, Urvashi from India, suggested that digital volunteers could play a greater role in needs assessments."	Damage & Need Assessment	Crowdsourcing																					x																								Findings from Focus Group Discussions with Affected Populations in Egypt - Clean version.pdf	"Pg. 9/12: 12) Innovative Approaches  • Among the issues raised is the need to use new technologies in providing aid to refugees. Some solutions, such as the use of mobiles and text messaging for the registration process and disseminating important information to refugees can strengthen refugee protection and improve access to aid."	Communication	Mobile																						x																							Summary of results from all surveys - Phase II Report.docx	"Pg. 49/64: Q6: What, if any, innovation solutions to improve disaster response have been piloted by your university/research centre? Summary of answers: One respondent said their institution had involved interfaith communities and vulnerable communities, including religious minorities, in their disaster activities. Several actors had worked with communities on capacity building, contingency planning and participatory real-time monitoring. The use of mobile knowledge resource centers for DRR education was also mentioned.Pg. 50/64: The collection of responses as examples of innovation in the field of disaster response mention a broad spectrum of innovation, not limited to technological advances. The National Red Cross Society and national host committee for disaster management talked about the creation of Disaster Management Laws; creating provisions for financial, technical and consultative support. The Multinational Force Standing Operating Procedures introduced the common framework for military planning to support disaster response operations, highlighting needs assessment and specific capacities. A number of technologies occupying a large part of the discussion were designed for alternative purposes, for example: the use of low-cost drone technology, Geographic Information System (GIS), social media and Short Messaging Systems (SMS); all re- introduced and repurposed to help to provide alternative affordable solutions to DRR. Additionally, many DRR specific technologies were suggested, such as: debris management, remote-sensors, deployable tactical operation systems, etc. While there were a large number of tools suggested, ultimately, there was a general consensus that there is a need for to understand the vulnerabilities and sources of resilience, and use tools to help do this.Pg. 50/64: Summary of answers: The community responses suggested a number of ways in which innovative solutions could improve disaster response. While the majority of the responses were negative – “No” – with regard to technological solutions, suggestions were made for improved government response linking building the capacity of CSOs, improving the relations between governments and humanitarian agencies, and improving transparency.Pg. 50/64: Q5: In your community, are there innovative solutions to improve disaster response so that it can better address the needs of vulnerable groups such as women, children, the elderly and persons with disabilities (PWDs)? If yes, what are they? Summary of answers: This question was somewhat inconclusive in that it did not provide substantial feedback, as most did not respond to this question. Of those that responded, the three points which were made were relatively standard responses I.e.: providing women with sanitary kits, collecting data on vulnerable groups prior to a disaster and providing special facilities for persons with disabilities. Community volunteers and household leaders to be trained to provide assistance to vulnerable populationsPg. 51/64: The CSO responses based on the experiences in improving disaster response were numerous and encompassed diverse issues. The recommendations put forth were in relation to: organizing response teams within communities, engaging affected communities in disaster response, empowering women at grassroots level to cope with natural disasters and climate change, and improving drought adaptation capacities. On a whole the technologies proposed were ones which are readily available and for the most part available. Here are some of the examples which were given: adopting eco-friendly technologies in constructing transitional shelters; obtaining insurance for assets and goods; using group SMS for emergency communication/coordination for both communities as well as the relief workers on the ground and using real-time group chatting for information sharing and providing resources to those who are connected.Pg. 51/64: The most common suggestion in terms of innovative solutions was improved use of information and communication technologies, including the use of mobile phones and social media. Several respondents also suggested more frequent partnerships with the private sector to increase response capacity as well as to introduce creative ideas through which to improve current mechanisms. The use of cash-based systems, drones, open source and web-based GIS were also mentioned.Pg. 52/64: Summary of answers: The HCTs suggested a number of ways in which innovative solutions could improve disaster response. With regard to technological solutions, several respondents suggested using emerging mobile phone technologies for early warning message dissemination and cash transfers. Others hoped technological advances could provide a solution for storing information on international and national humanitarian assistance provision and for mapping local capacities to respond. According to some, satellite remote sensing and real-time forecasting of hazards would improve preparedness and early decision-making. Increased use of social media, open source data and big data analysis were encouraged. Some HCTs discussed the different groups of affected populations and how innovative solutions could better address responding to each of their needs. For example, early warning systems could be tailored for disabled populations and children could be offered user-friendly online classes where appropriate. In terms of processes, one HCT called for greater flexibility in responding to different scales of emergencies and being able to selectively activate and use clusters in the early phases of a disaster as required. Another HCT saw advantages in engaging with external actors, such as Global Pulse, to use large data sets for strengthening risk reduction, as well as using open source applications, such as Open Street Map, for updating data and information related to high risk areas. In addition, increased South-South cooperation was identified as a potential area of improvement for better disaster response. Some argued that instead of needing new innovative products and processes, the focus should be on ensuring universal and accepted use of existing ones. In a more general level, the need for strengthened private-public partnership was called for. One respondent called for better needs assessment tools.Pg. 43/64: What areas of innovation do you believe have the most potential to improve the disaster response of various actors, including your university/research centre? Select up to three of the below.(See figures at link)Pg. 45/64: When there is a disaster, what is the main way your organisation shares information with local civil society and/or affected communities on the response? / When there is a disaster, what is the main way you share information with other community members and agencies involved in disaster response? Select up to three of the below.(See pie charts and figures at link)Pg. 45/64: When there is a disaster, what is the main way your CSO shares information with actors within the formal humanitarian system (such as Government, UN agencies and INGOs) in order to coordinate a response?(See pie charts and figures at link)"	Damage & Need Assessment	Imagery (UAV/Satellite)	Damage & Need Assessment	Social Media	Communication	Mobile																												x													"2 Stakeholders Consultation Report- West & Central Africa, May 2014.pdf"	"Pg. 2/16: The need for innovation was also discussed. Participants highlighted several examples of innovative solutions already in place: the Strategic Response Plan for the Sahel (2014-2016) as an example of multiyear initiatives; the programme ‘Cities and climate change’; ECOWAS humanitarian policy and ECOWARN; cash transfers; use of social media and mobile phones in communicating with communities; distribution of locally-produced enriched flour; and cooperation with private sector organizations (such as in response to the 2012 floods in Nigeria).Pg. 2/16: Cash transfers were recognised as a way to support the local economy and empower people to make their own choices about what they and their families needed in these cases, as a way to support economic and social development and alleviate the baseline of poverty and vulnerability in many areas affected by crisis.Pg. 12/16: The three winners REGIONAL Kit for Autonomous Cash Transfer in Humanitarian Emergencies – KACHE Organizations involved: Action Against Hunger (ACF), funded by the UN World Food Program (WFP), through its Cooperating Partner Innovation Fund (CPIF). The use of e-transfers in humanitarian response is often limited by a lack of e-payment infrastructure in many affected areas. The Project aims to address this by developing a Kit for Autonomous Cash Transfer in Humanitarian Emergencies - KACHE. The kit includes a small number of “terminals”, which run on long-lasting batteries and do not need to be connected to a telecommunication network. They can be deployed at selected locations offering goods and/or services (shops, market stalls, health centers, etc...), matched with a large number of smart cards that can be easily configured at the beginning of the response with beneficiaries’ personal data, amount of cash to be transferred, etc. The system is mobile and can be deployed in any given operation where cash transfer can be a viable response option and can be used “offline” in remote contexts, based on a “closed-circuit branchless structure”.Pg. 12/16: CHAD Creation of a Unit in Charge of Bilharzia Organizations involved: Reach for Change, the Canton and the Health Centre of Torrock, Etablissements GouinPala Institutions, Pharmaceutical Plant, Tigo-Chad, and KoudoriGuizine Enterprise. In the Torrock area, children suffer from urinary problems caused by Bilharzia. Over 60 per cent of children 1-14 years old carry Bilharzia eggs. The population is poorly informed about the disease, and children are left largely untreated. The project aims at creating a mobile screening unit in the Torrock area. Parents wishing to test their children only have to send a message to a special hotline to make an appointment. Samples of the disease are taken at the child’s home and test results are communicated via SMS. Families of children tested positive for the ailment pay for their prescription drugs via cell phone through Tigo Cash. Drugs are delivered directly to childrens’ home. In one year, 750 children were tested at their homes, and 60 per cent were treated. The project could be expanded to other districts and regions throughout Chad.Pg. 12/16: BENIN Preparing Communities Affected by Recurrent Flooding with Clean Drinking Water Solutions Organizations involved: Care International Benin/Togo, DayOne Response, Inc., Procter and Gamble Children’s Safe Drinking Water Program Northern Benin faces recurrent annual flooding, which resulted in a high vulnerability of the population due to the consumption of muddy and contaminated drinking water from the Niger River during recent emergencies. The project will empower individuals with tools to convert highly turbid water into clean drinking water and promote water and hygiene education. The DayOne Waterbag, coupled with P&G Purifier of Water packets, provides all the essential functions of municipal water supply in a personal backpack: water collection, transport, treatment and hygienic storage. The bags will be distributed to affected communities in Benin and the project evaluated to determine its effectiveness as a tool to support post-crisis water needs.Pg. 13/16: Innovation When asked to give three examples of innovative tools or solutions to humanitarian problems in West and Central Africa, one third of people did not respond. Those who did named the following as examples of successful innovation, which can be categorized thus:[SEE TABLE 3]Pg. 2/16: They also encouraged organizations to support and strengthen mechanisms for knowledge transfer and to share lessons learned across emergencies. Participants discussed various aspects of innovation, pointing out that it is not just about technology but about social changes and leveraging knowledge of the local culture and landscape on order to avoid ‘importing’ ideas which may not fit the real local needs. They referenced the example of using radio communication in displaced people’s native languages to increase understanding of the services available across borders (Niger and Nigeria one example, Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire another)."	Online Cash	Mobile	Communication	Mobile	Water	Purifiers/Filters																x										x	x														